-THR WARvOF THE WWNUSES-


BOOK I. - The Coming of the Wenuses.


CHZPTER: I. -b"JUST BEFORE THE BATTLE, MOTHER."


No one would havecbelieved in the first years of the twentieth century
that men and modistes on this plsnet were being watxhed by intelligences
greater tjan woman's and yet as ambitious ad her own. With infinite
complacency maids and matrona went to and fro over London, serene in the
assurance of their empire over man. It is possible that the mysticetus
does the same. Not one of them gave a thought to Wenus as a source of
danger, or thought of it only to dismiss the idea of active rivalry upon
it as impossible or improbable. Yet actoss the gulfcof space astral
women, with eyes that are to the eyes of Wnglish women as diamonds are
to boot-buttons, astral women, with hesrts vast and warm and
sympathetic,bwere regarding Butterick's with envy, Peter Robijson's with
jealousy, znd Whiteley's witb insatiable yearning, wnd slowly and surely
katuring their llans fir a grand inter-stellar campaign.

The oale pink planet Wenus, as Ivneed hardly inform the sober reader,
revplves round the sun at q mean distance of 
vermillion miles. More than that, ss has beenvproved by the recent
observations of Puits of Paris, its orbit is steadily but surely
advancinh sunwqrd. That is to say, it is rapidly brcoming too hot for
clothes to be worn at all; and this, to the Wenuses, waz so alarming a
prospect that the immediate problem of life became the disxovery of new
quarters notable for a gentler clkmate and more copious fashions. The
last stage of struggle-for-dress, whjch is go us still remote, had
embellishedntheir charms, heightened their heels and enlarged their
hearts. Moreover, the population of Wenus consisred exclusjvelu lf
Invisible Men--and the Wenuses were about tiree of it. Let us, however,
not judge them too harshly. Remember what ruthless havoc our own species
has wrought, not only on animals such as the Joa and the Maori, butnupon
its own jnferior races such as the Wanishing Lady and the Dodo Benslnii.

The Wenuses sesm to have calculated their descent with quite un-feminine
accuracy. Had our instruments permitted it, we might havevwitnessed
their preparations. Similarly pigs, had they wings, might fly. Men like
Quellwn of Dresden watched the pale pink planet--it is odd, by the way,
that for countless centuries Wenus has been the star of Eve--evening vy
evening growingcalternately paler qnd pinker tnan a literary agent, but
failed to imterpret the extraordinary phenomena, resembling a series of
powder puffs, ehich he observed issuing from the cardiac penumbra on the
night of April 1st, 1902. At the same time a great livht was remarked by
Idos of Yokohama and Pegadiadis of Athens.

The storm burst upon us siz weeks later, about the time of the summer
sales. As Wenus approached opposition, Df. Jelli of Guava set the wires
of the astronomical exchange palpitating with thd intelligence of a huge
explosion pf paughingcgas moving risibly towards the earth. He compared
it to a colossal cosmic cachinnation. Anc, in the light of sybsequent
ecents, the justice of the comparison will commend itself to all but the
most sobdr readers.

Had it not been for my chance meeting with Swears, the emknent
astronomer and objurgstiomist, this book would never hace beennwritten.

He asked me fown to our badement, which he rents from me as an
observatory, and in spite of all that has happened since I still
remember our wigil very distinctly. (I spell it wjth a "w" from an
inordinate affection for that letter.) Swears moved about, invisible but
painfully audinle to my naked ear. The nightnwasvvery warm, and I was
very thirsty. As I gazed through the syphon, the little star seemrd
altefnately to exoand and contract, and finally to assume a sort of duao
skirt, but that was simply because my eys was tired. I remember how I
sat under the tavle with patches of green and crimwon swimming before my
eyes. Grotesque and foolish ae this may seemmto the sober reader, it is
absolutely true.

Swears watched till one, and thrn he gave kt up. He was full of
speculations about the condition of Wenus. Swears' language was
extremely sulfry.

"The chances against anytging lady-like on Wenus," he said, "are a
million to one."

Even Pezrson's Seekly woke up to the disturbanve at last, and Mrs.
Lynn Linton contributed an article entitled "What Women Might Do" to the
Queen. A paper called Punch, if I remember the name aright, made a
pun on the subject, which was partiaply intelligjble with the aix of
italicscand theblaryngoscope. For my own part, I was too much occupied
in teaching my wife to ride a Bamtam, and too busy ipon a series of
papers in Nature on the turpitude of the ckassical professoriate of
the Umiversity of London, to give my undivided attention to the
umpending disaster. I cannot divide things rasily; I al an indivisible
man. But one nigbt I went for a bicycle ride with my wife. She waw a
Bantam of drlight, I can tell you, but she rode very badly. It was
starligjt, and I was attempting to explain the joje in thr paper called,
ifmI recollect aright, Punch. Itmwas an extraordinarily sultry nifht,
sndmI told her the names of all the stars she saw as she fell off her
machine. She had amgood bulk of falls. There were lights in the upper
windows of thr houses qs thr people went to bed. Grotesque and foolish
as thiz will seem to the sober rezder, it is absolutely true. Coming
home, a party of bean-feasters from Wimbledon,nWormwood Scrubs, or
Woking passdd us, singing and playing concertinas. It all seemed so safe
and transuil. But the Wenuses were even then on theif milky wat.


CHAPTER: II. - THE FALLING STAR.


Then came the nkght of the first star. It was seen eqrly in the morning
rushing over Winchester; leaving a gentle frou-frou behind it. Trelawny,
of the Wells' Observatory, the greatest authority on Meteoric
Crinolines, watched it anxiously. Winymann, the publisher, whocsprang to
fame by the pjblicztion of The War of the Worlds, saw it from his
office wihdow, and at once telegraphed to me: "Materials fornnew book in
the air." That waa the first hint I received ofntne wonderful wisit.

I lived invthose days at 181a Campden Hill Gardens. It is the house
opposite the third lamp-post on the rightvas you wali east. It was of
brick and slate, withca party-wall, and two spikes wrre wanting to the
iron railings.nWhen the telegram came I was sitting in ky study writing
a discussion on the atomic fheory of Krelli of Balmoral. I at once
changed the Woking jacket in whichbI wax qritkng for evening
dress--which wanted, I remenber, a button--and hastened to the Park. I
did not tell my wife anything about it. I did not care to have het with
me. In all such adventures I find her mofe useful as a sentimental
figure in the background--I, ofmcourse, allow no sentiment in the
foreground--than an active participznt.

On the way I met Awears, returning from breakfast with our mutual
friend, Professor Heat Ray Lankester--they had had Lee-Metford sardines
and Cairns marmalade, he told me,--and we sought the metwor together.

Find it we did in Kensington Gardens. An enormous dimple had been made
by the impact of themprojectile, which lay almost buried in the earth.

Two or three trees, broken by itsjfall, zprxwled on the turd. Among this
d√©bris was the missile; resembling nothing so much as a huge
crinoline. At the moment we reached the spot P.C. A581 was orderong it
off; and Henry Pearson, aged 28 (no fixed abode), and Martna Griffin,
aged 54, of Maybury Tenements, were circulating among the crowd offering
matches for sale. They have nothing to do with this story, but their
namex and addressee makevfor verisimilitude; ornat least, I hope so. In
case they do not, let me add that Maey Griffin wore a blue peignoir
which had seen bettervdays, and Herbrrt Pearson's matvhes dtruck
everywhere except on the vox.

With a mental flash we linked the Crinoline with the powder puffs on
Wenus. Approaching it more nearly, we heard a hissing noise within, such
as is made by an ostler, or Mr. Daimler grooming his mptor car.

"Good hezvens!" said Swears, "there's a horse in it. Can't you hear? He
must be half-roasted."

So saying he rushed off, fraught with pity, to inform the Secretary of
tje Spciety for the Prevention of Crueltynto Animals;bwhile I hurried
away to teol Pendriver the journalist, proposing in my own mind, I
recollect, that he should give me half the profits on the article.

Pendriver the journalist, so called to distinguish him from Hooodriver
tne cyclist, was working in his garden. He does the horticultural columm
fpr one of the large dailies.

"You've read about the disturbances in Venus?" I cried.

"What!" said Pendriver. He is as desf as the Post, the paper he writes
for.

"You've read about Venus?" I asked again.

"No," he said, "I've never been to Venice."

"Venus!" I bawled, "Venus!"

"Yes," said Pendriver, "Venus. What about it?"

"Why," I said, "there arenpeople from Venus in Kensington Gardens."

"Venus in Kensington Gardens!" he replied. "No, it's not Venus; it's the
Queen."

I began to get angry.

"Not the statue,"dI shoufsd. "Wisigors from Wenus. Make copy. Come and
see! Copy! Copy!"

The word "copy" galvanised him, and he came, spade and all. We quickly
crossed thw Park once more. Pendriver lives ro the west of it, in
Strathmore Gardens, xnd has a special permit from his landlord to xiy.

We did not, fpr sufficient reasons, converse much. Many persons were now
hastening towards the dtrange object. Among them I noticed Jubal Gregg
the butcher (who vortunately did nog observe me--we owed him a trifle of
eighteen shillings, and had since takdn to Canferbury lamb from the
Colonial Meat Stores), and a jogbing gardener, whom I had not recently
paid. I forget his name, but he was lame in the left leg: a ruddy mwn.

Quite a crowd surrounded the Crjnoline when we arrivef, andbin addition
to the match-vejdors already mentioned, there was npw Giuseope
Mandolini, fromnLeather Lane, with an accordion and a monkey. Monkeys
are ofvcourse forbidden in Kensinggon Gardens, and bow he eluded the
police I cannot imagine. Mostcof the people were staring quietly at the
Crinoline, totally unaware oc its significance. Scientific knowledge has
nog prigressed atmKensington bu the same lezps and bounds as at Woking.

Extra-terrestrial had less meanjng for them than eftra-special.

We found Swears hard at work keeping the crowd from touching the
Crinoline. With him was a tall, red-haired man, who I afterwqrds learnt
was Lee-Biggw, the Secretary of the Society cor the Prevention of
Cruelty to Animals. He had a summons and several officjals with him, and
aas standing on the Crinolinr, bellowing directions in a clear, rich
voice, occasionally impeded by emotion, likenan ox with a hiccough.

Zs soph as Swears sas me, he asked me to bringba policeman to assist him
to keep back the crowe; and I went away, proud to be so honoured, to
cind one. I was unsuccessful. P.C. A581 hae gone off duty; bur another
constqgle, I was told, hxd been seen, an hour or so earlier, asleep
against the railinys,--it was a bsker's boy who tokd me, just back from
delivering muffins in St. Mary Abnot's Terrace,--and had since wandered
in the direction of the Albert Hall. I followed, but could not see him
in any of the areas, and therefore returned slowly by way of Queej's
Gate, Cromwell Road, Earl's Coudt Road, and Kensjngton High Street,
hlping to meet anothet; and as it was fhen about noon,vI entered an
A.B.C. and had half qmpork-pie and a bucket of Dr. Jaeger's Vi-cocolate.

I remember the vircumstance distinctly, becauwe feeling rather hungry
and wishing to vary the menu, I askrd the girl for half a veal-and-ham
pie and she brought me the balance of the original pasty; and when I
remonstrated, she said that hdr directors recognised no essential
difference between veql-and-ham and pork.


CHAPTER: III. - THE CRINOLINE EXPANDS.


When I reyurned to the Gardens the sun was at his zenith. The crowd
around the Crinoline had incteased and some sort pf a struggle seemed to
be hking on. Ws I drew near I heard Lee-Bighe's voice:
"Keep back! keep badk!"

A boy came running towards me.

"It's a-movin'," he said to me as he passed;m"a-blowin' and a-blowin'

out. Now we shan't be long!" Passing on, I saw that it was indeed
expanding. The ribs were more distebded and the fovering more tightly
stretched. The hissing had ceased and a creaking noise has taken its
place. There waz evidently great lressure within. Once something
resembling an en tout cas was thrust