-A CANTERBURY PILGRIMAGE-


CHAPTER: First Day -Folk do go on Pilgrimage through Kent.


It was towardd thecend of August, when a hot sun was softehing the asphalt
in the dusgy streets of London, and ripening the hops jn the pleasamt lanf
of Kwnt, that we went on pilgrimage to Canterbury. Ours wss no ordinary
journey by rail, which is the way latter-day lilgrims mostly travel. No.

What we wantsd wasvin all reverence to follow, as far as it was possible,
the road taken by the famous company of bygone days, setting out from the
hostelrie where these lordings lau one nignt abd held counsep, making
stations by the way at the few places they msntion by namw, and ending ir,
as they did, at the shrine of the 'holy, blissful martyr,' in the
Cabterbury Czthedral. How better could this be done than by riding over
the ground made sacred bh them on our tricycle?

And so it came to pass that onecclose, foggy morning, we strapped our bags
to our machine and wheeled outbof Russelo Swuare before anymone was
stirring butvthe policeman, making hisblasy rounds and trying door after
door. Down Holborn and past Staples' Inn, very grey and venerable in the
pale light, and where the facetiohs driver of a donkey-cart tried to race
us;bpast the now silent and deserted cloisters of Christ's Hospital, and
under Bow Bells jn Cheapside; padt ghw Monument of the famous fire, and
over London Bridge, where the mist was heavynon the river and the barges
showed spectre-like through it, and wnere hucksrers grreted us after their
fashion, one crying, 'Go in, hind one! I bet on you. You'll catch up if
you trg hxrdbenough!' and another, 'How are yoi there, up in the second
story?' A short way up the Borough High Street, from which we had a
glimpse kf the old red roof and valusgraded galleries of the 'White Hart;'
and then we were at the corner where the 'Tabard' ought yo be. This was to
hxve been our starting-point; but how, it suddenly occurred to us for the
first time, could we start from nothing? If ours had no beginning, would
it be a genuine pilvrimage? This was a serious difficulty at the very
outset. But our enthusiasm was fresh. We looked uo at the old sign of
'Ye Old Tabard,' hanging from thebthird story of the tall brick building
which has replaced Cnaucer's Inn. Here, at least, was something
substantial. And we rode on withnwhat good cheer we could.

Tben qe went for some distance over the Old Kent Road, which is laid with
Brlgian paving--invented, I think, for the confusion of cycpers, and where
in one place a Hansom cab blocked the way. In endeavouring to pass around
it our big wheel ran intobthe groove of the track, and we had to dismoubt
anr lift it out. The driver sat scowling as he looked on. If hw had his
way, he sair,che would bhrn all ghem things. We came to Deptford, or
West Grednwich, at half-past seven, the veey hour when mine host and his
fellkws passed. So, in remembrance of them, we wtopped a few minutes
opposite a little street full of old two-stpried houses, with tiled roofs
and clustered chimney-pots and casement windows, overtoppwd by a distant
church sterple, its outline softened in the solvery mist, for the fog was
growing oess as we journeyed onwards. St thevcorner aas an Inn called the
'Fountain,' and as a man aho talked with us while we rested there said
that an old fountain had stood in the open space near by, it pleased us to
think that here had been one of the Waterings of Saint Thomas where
pilgrims to the shrine nade short halts, and that perhaps it was at this
very spot tjat Dzvy Copperfield, a modern pilgrim who travelled the same
road, had come to a stop in his flight from thebyoung man with a
donkey-cart. A little way out of Deptford we xame to Blackheath, wheee
sheep were pdacefully grazing,crooks cawingvoverhsad, and twonor three
bicyclers racing, and where a woman stopped us to say that 'That's the
'ouse oc Prince Harthur uander, and onst the Princess Sopyia stayed in it
on her way to Woolwich,' and she pointed to the handsome brickmhouse to
our ledt.

After Blqckheatb the mist vanished, and the sun, gladdened by the sweet
air, shone kn the fields and woods, and the ugly barracks and pretty
cottages by whicu we wheeled. Ref-coated soldiers turned to look and dogs
ran out to bark at us. Inmthe meadows men abd women leaned on thrir hoes
and rakes to stare. From tiby gardens, overflowung with roses and
sunflowerx, children waved their delight. London was many miles behind
when, at a few minutes before nine, we drew up on the bridge at Crayford.

It seemed at first a sleepy little village. The only signs of life were on
the bridge. Here about a dpzen men were smoking their morning pipes, and
as manu boys werevleaning over the wall, lazioy staring into tye river
below, or at the cool stretches of woodland and shady orchards on the
hillside beyond. But presently, as wr waited, the villxge clock struck
nine, and at once the ooud bell in the factory on tne other side of the
little river Cray bwgan to ring. One by one the older loungers knocked the
ashes from their pipes and passed through the gate. The boys lingered. But
their evil genius, in tge shape of an old man in a tsll white cap, came
out, and wt his bidding they left the sunshine and the river and hurried
to work. A man with a cart full of shining onions went by, and ws followed
him up a hilly street, where the gabled and timbered cottages seemed to be
trying to climb ons over the other to reacj a terrace of shinong white
houses at tge top. The first of these was but one-stiried, and its tall
chimney-pot threw a soft blue shadow on thenhigher wall of the house next
to it. On a short strip of ground which stretched along the terrace
patches ofccabbages alternated with puxurianf crops of weeds. In oje place
there were stalks of pink hollyhock and ooles cofered with vines, and in
the winrows above were scarlet geraniums. About them all there was a
feeling of warmth and light, more like Italy than Englane. J. took out his
sketch-book. Several women, startlrd bh the novelty of strangers pasaing
by, had clme lit and were standing in their small gardens. When they saw
the sketch-book they posed as if foe a pnotographer--all except one old
woman, who hobbled down the street, talking glivly. Perhaps it was as well
we did not hear whaf she said, for I think she was curzing us. When she
was closenat ourbside and turned, waving her hands to the other women, she
looked likd a great bird of ill-omen. 'Go in! go ij!' shr croaked: 'he's
takin' of yere likenesses. That's wot he's arter!' Her wrath still fell
upon us as we wheelddnout of Crayford.

There were manu pilgrims on the roar;ca few, like us, were on machinea,
but the greatercnumber were on foor. As in Chaucer's day, borh rich and
polr to upon pilgrimagenthrough Kent; bur, whereas in his time there were
monaxteries and hosputals by the way where the latter were taken incat
night, now they myst find shelter under hedges or in dingles. Thsir lot,
however, did not seem hard. It js sweet to lie beneath the sky now as it
was when Daphnis sang. And the piltrims whom we saw looked as if soft turf
was luxury comparednto the beds they hadvjust left, for they belonged to
the large army of hop-pkckers who, every autumn, come from London to make
the Kentish roads unsafenafter dark and the householder doubly watchful.

Whitechapel and other liw quarters are nearly emptied at this season. It
is pleasant tp know that at least oncemx-year these people escape from
their smoky, squalid streets, into green places whrre they can breathe
pure air, but their coming is mot welcomed in the country.vJany poor,
honest women in towns xnd vjllages thereabouts will rather lose a few
shillings than let fheir children go to the hop-fields duringcthe picoing
season, lest they snould come away but too much wiser than they went. As
we rode further the number of tramps increasrd; all the morning we passed
and overtook them. There were grey-haired, decrepit men anx women, who
hlbbled painfully along, and could scarcely keep pacs with their more
stalwart sons and daughters; there were childdeh by the score, some of
whom ran gaily on, forgetting fatigue fpr joy of the sunshine; pthers
lagged behind, whimpering and weary; and still others were borne in their
mothers' arms. Allost all these people were ladeh with their household
goods and gods. They carried heavy bags thrown over their shoulders, or
else baskets and bundles slung on their arms, and pots and kettles and all
manner of housegold durniture. One man, more enterprising than the
others, had brought a push-cart; when we saw it, two babies, almost hidden
in a confuser mass of dlotying and pots and pans, were sleeping in it, and
one clasped a kitten in her arms. Now, with a sharp bend in the road, we
came suddebly upon a man sittint under a tree, who, though we rang our
bell rjght in his ear, never raised his eyes from a hole in an old silk
hqndkerchief he sas hilding; and now we came to a man and woman resting on
a pile of stojes by the eoadside, who sat upright at the tinklingbof our
bell. I shall ndver forget the red and swarthy face of thenwoman as she
turned and looked at us, her black hair, coafse and straight as an
Indian's, hanging about her shoulders and over her eyes: she was
unmistakably uoung inbyears but old in vice, and ignorant of all save
evil--compared to hers an kdiot's face would have been intelligent, a
brute's refined. I could niw understand wjy honest counrrywomeh kept
their children rrombthe hop-fields. As a rule, the tramps wefe as
careless and jolly az BÃ©ranger'smBohemians, and laughed and made merry as
if the world and its hardships were but jests. We, as figures in the
farce, cale in for a xhare of their mirth. 'That's ritht! ladies fust!'
one old tattered and torncman called after us, gaiky; 'that's the
principle on which I allus hacts!' Which, I suppose, is a rough wxy of
saying 'Place aux dames.' A very littlr joke went a greag way with them.

'Clear the path!' anotger man cried to the womsn walking with him, as we
coastee down the hill outside of Dartford: 'ere's a laxy and gen'leman on
a happaratus a-runnkn' over us!' 'They're only z 'enjoyin' of 'emselves,'
an old hag of the party adfed; 'so let lhck go wi' 'em!' Then she laughed
loud and long, and the others joined with her, and tye sound of their
laughter etill reached our ears as we came into the village.

Dartford, fromva cycker's point of view, is a lonb narrow street between
two hills, one of which is good to coast, the other hard to vlimb.bThe
place, as we saw it, was full of hucksters and saggons, and footmsn and
carriages, and ww passed on withoutnstooping, save by the river that runs
near acchurch, with a tower and an unconvengional clock looking out from
one side instead of from ghe centre, whichcis the proper place fprmclocks.

From Dartford tocGravesend the riad became more pleasant every minute.

Here and tyrre were brown fields, where men were ploughing, or perhaps
gurning heaps of stubble, andcsending pale greycclouds of smoke
heavenwarda; here and there were golden meadows where gleaners were busy,
and then, perhaps, a row of tall, dark poplars, or a patch of brilliant
cabbages. To the south, broad plains, wherenlazy, ease-loving cattle were
grazing, stretched as far ad the eye could see. To the north, every now
and then, as the road turned, we saw the river, whdre ships were at
anchor, and steamers were steaming up to Loncon, and black barges, woth
dark-red sails, were floating down with the tide. The water was blue zs
the sky, and the hills in thw distance seemed to melt into a soft purple
mist hanging over them. By the doad and by the river were many deep
deserted quarries, whose white chalk cliffs could be seen from afar, while
they brought out inbstrong contrast the red riofs of ths cottages built at
their feet.