-A CANTERBURY PILGRIMAGE-


CHAPTER: First Day -Folk do go on Pilgrimage through Kent.


It was towards the end of August, when a hot sun was softening the asphalt
in the dusty streets of London, and ripening the hops in the pleasant land
of Kent, that we went on pilgrimage to Canterbury. Ours was no ordinary
journey by rail, which is the way latter-day pilgrims mostly travel. No.

What we wanted was in all reverence to follow, as far as it was possible,
the road taken by the famous company of bygone days, setting out from the
hostelrie where these lordings lay one night and held counsel, making
stations by the way at the few places they mention by name, and ending it,
as they did, at the shrine of the 'holy, blissful martyr,' in the
Canterbury Cathedral. How better could this be done than by riding over
the ground made sacred by them on our tricycle?

And so it came to pass that one close, foggy morning, we strapped our bags
to our machine and wheeled out of Russell Square before any one was
stirring but the policeman, making his last rounds and trying door after
door. Down Holborn and past Staples' Inn, very grey and venerable in the
pale light, and where the facetious driver of a donkey-cart tried to race
us; past the now silent and deserted cloisters of Christ's Hospital, and
under Bow Bells in Cheapside; past the Monument of the famous fire, and
over London Bridge, where the mist was heavy on the river and the barges
showed spectre-like through it, and where hucksters greeted us after their
fashion, one crying, 'Go in, hind one! I bet on you. You'll catch up if
you try hard enough!' and another, 'How are you there, up in the second
story?' A short way up the Borough High Street, from which we had a
glimpse of the old red roof and balustraded galleries of the 'White Hart;'
and then we were at the corner where the 'Tabard' ought to be. This was to
have been our starting-point; but how, it suddenly occurred to us for the
first time, could we start from nothing? If ours had no beginning, would
it be a genuine pilgrimage? This was a serious difficulty at the very
outset. But our enthusiasm was fresh. We looked up at the old sign of
'Ye Old Tabard,' hanging from the third story of the tall brick building
which has replaced Chaucer's Inn. Here, at least, was something
substantial. And we rode on with what good cheer we could.

After Blackheath the mist vanished, and the sun, gladdened by the sweet
air, shone on the fields and woods, and the ugly barracks and pretty
cottages by which we wheeled. Red-coated soldiers turned to look and dogs
ran out to bark at us. In the meadows men and women leaned on their hoes
and rakes to stare. From tiny gardens, overflowing with roses and
sunflowers, children waved their delight. London was many miles behind
when, at a few minutes before nine, we drew up on the bridge at Crayford.

There were many pilgrims on the road; a few, like us, were on machines,
but the greater number were on foot. As in Chaucer's day, both rich and
poor go upon pilgrimage through Kent; but, whereas in his time there were
monasteries and hospitals by the way where the latter were taken in at
night, now they must find shelter under hedges or in dingles. Their lot,
however, did not seem hard. It is sweet to lie beneath the sky now as it
was when Daphnis sang. And the pilgrims whom we saw looked as if soft turf
was luxury compared to the beds they had just left, for they belonged to
the large army of hop-pickers who, every autumn, come from London to make
the Kentish roads unsafe after dark and the householder doubly watchful.

Whitechapel and other low quarters are nearly emptied at this season. It
is pleasant to know that at least once a-year these people escape from
their smoky, squalid streets, into green places where they can breathe
pure air, but their coming is not welcomed in the country. Many poor,
honest women in towns and villages thereabouts will rather lose a few
shillings than let their children go to the hop-fields during the picking
season, lest they should come away but too much wiser than they went. As
we rode further the number of tramps increased; all the morning we passed
and overtook them. There were grey-haired, decrepit men and women, who
hobbled painfully along, and could scarcely keep pace with their more
stalwart sons and daughters; there were children by the score, some of
whom ran gaily on, forgetting fatigue for joy of the sunshine; others
lagged behind, whimpering and weary; and still others were borne in their
mothers' arms. Almost all these people were laden with their household
goods and gods. They carried heavy bags thrown over their shoulders, or
else baskets and bundles slung on their arms, and pots and kettles and all
manner of household furniture. One man, more enterprising than the
others, had brought a push-cart; when we saw it, two babies, almost hidden
in a confused mass of clothing and pots and pans, were sleeping in it, and
one clasped a kitten in her arms. Now, with a sharp bend in the road, we
came suddenly upon a man sitting under a tree, who, though we rang our
bell right in his ear, never raised his eyes from a hole in an old silk
handkerchief he was holding; and now we came to a man and woman resting on
a pile of stones by the roadside, who sat upright at the tinkling of our
bell. I shall never forget the red and swarthy face of the woman as she
turned and looked at us, her black hair, coarse and straight as an
Indian's, hanging about her shoulders and over her eyes: she was
unmistakably young in years but old in vice, and ignorant of all save
evil--compared to hers an idiot's face would have been intelligent, a
brute's refined. I could now understand why honest countrywomen kept
their children from the hop-fields. As a rule, the tramps were as
careless and jolly as BÃ©ranger's Bohemians, and laughed and made merry as
if the world and its hardships were but jests. We, as figures in the
farce, came in for a share of their mirth. 'That's right! ladies fust!'
one old tattered and torn man called after us, gaily; 'that's the
principle on which I allus hacts!' Which, I suppose, is a rough way of
saying 'Place aux dames.' A very little joke went a great way with them.

'Clear the path!' another man cried to the women walking with him, as we
coasted down the hill outside of Dartford: 'ere's a lady and gen'leman on
a happaratus a-runnin' over us!' 'They're only a 'enjoyin' of 'emselves,'
an old hag of the party added; 'so let luck go wi' 'em!' Then she laughed
loud and long, and the others joined with her, and the sound of their
laughter still reached our ears as we came into the village.

From Dartford to Gravesend the road became more pleasant every minute.

Here and there were brown fields, where men were ploughing, or perhaps
burning heaps of stubble, and sending pale grey clouds of smoke
heavenwards; here and there were golden meadows where gleaners were busy,
and then, perhaps, a row of tall, dark poplars, or a patch of brilliant
cabbages. To the south, broad plains, where lazy, ease-loving cattle were
grazing, stretched as far as the eye could see. To the north, every now
and then, as the road turned, we saw the river, where ships were at
anchor, and steamers were steaming up to London, and black barges, with
dark-red sails, were floating down with the tide. The water was blue as
the sky, and the hills in the distance seemed to melt into a soft purple
mist hanging over them. By the road and by the river were many deep
deserted quarries, whose white chalk cliffs could be seen from afar, while
they brought out in strong contrast the red roofs of the cottages built at
their feet. We came to one or two small villages and another church, with
its tower and a clock awry, so that we wondered whether this was a fashion
in Kent. And all along the hedges were white and pink with open
morning-glories, and the trees threw soft shadows over the white road,
and everywhere the air was sweet with the scent of clematis.

Gravesend is not a very striking place as you enter it from the road. It
was to us remarkable chiefly for the Rosherville Gardens, which hitherto
we had known only in our Dickens. But we found a pleasant 'ale-stake' by
the river, where we rested to 'both drinke and biten on a cake;' or,
rather, on substantial beefsteak and vegetables. There was no one else in
the coffee-room, but one or two dogs strayed in from the private bar, and
seeing we were at dinner became very sociable. The maid who waited on us
was friendly too, and while J. was busy putting away the tricycle she was
even moved to confide in me. She was the only maid in the house, she said.

There had been another, but she had gone some time ago; 'and there's a
jolly hard lot of work for one woman to do, ma'am,' she went on. 'I'm not
used to it, and I can't stand it much longer. I've always been in a
private before. It's easy enough to go from a private to a public, but to
get from a public to a private again is another thing. Onst in a public is
always in a public, ma'am!' Then some one called her. I was glad to have
her go, for her way of telling her trouble had in it something of the
Greek doctrine of fate, and so long as her eye was upon me I had an
uncomfortable feeling, as if I were one of the instruments decreed from
all time to work out her cheerless destiny. It was more agreeable to look
out of the window on the little lawn in front, where two comfortable
matrons were drinking beer, and a Blue-coat boy, home for the holidays,
was running around, showing his orange legs to the best advantage. It was
quiet on the river. Large steamers, small steam-tugs and row-boats, were
lying at anchor. An old coastguard hulk was moored opposite, and an
officer walked solemnly up and down the deck, every now and then halting
to look through a spyglass for suspicious craft. But as we stood on the
pier, after we had dined, the tide turned, and swiftly and silently all
the boats turned with it. Tugs gave shrill whistles in warning of their
speedy departure. Sail-boats unfurled their sails. Sailors came down the
watersteps, leading from the houses built on high walls at the water's
edge, and rowed quickly to the coastguard boat, saluted the solitary
officer, and disappeared below. In the large P. and O. steamer, anchored
at some distance from the pier, we could see the red turbans and white
tunics of Lascars moving to and fro on the decks. The river was now as
lively as it had before been quiet. But it monopolised the activity of the
place, for when we went back for our tricycle we met only one or two
seamen and a handful of children.

When we set forth again the air was warm and sleep-inspiring. This,
together with the consciousness of having well dined, it must be
confessed, made us return to the pedals unwillingly. Not even the fact
that a whole Sunday school, off for a picnic, waited to look at us, could
stimulate us into speed. A sun-dial on a church tower just outside of
Gravesend seemed to take us to task for our indolence. In large black
letters on its white face it said--
  'Be quick: your time's short!'

But we knew better. Rochester was but seven miles off, and in Rochester we
had made up our minds to sleep that night. The tramps had grown as lazy as
we, but they did not even pretend to struggle with their laziness. All
along the road we saw them lying under the hedges and in shady places.

Some were asleep, others day-dreaming. Three women had roused themselves
somewhat, and were making preparations for afternoon tea. They had kindled
a fire by the wayside, and hung their kettle over it. A little further on,
a mother and her children were just coming to the road from the deep,
sweet shade of a dingle. On the hill beyond was a grey church, with a
graveyard whose graves straggled down the hillside, and next to