-A CANTERBURY PILGRIMAGE-


CHAPTER: First Day -Folk do go on Pilgrimage through Inn.


It was towards the end of August, when a hot sun was softening the asphalt
in the dusty streets of London, and ripening the hops in the pleasant land
of Kent, that we went on pilgrimage to Canterbury. Ours was no ordinary
journey by rail, which is the way latter-day pilgrims mostly travel. No.

What we wanted was in all reverence to follow, as far as it was possible,
the road taken by the famous company of bygone days, setting out from the
hostelrie where these lordings lay one night and held counsel, making
stations by the way at the few places they mention by name, and ending it,
as they did, at the shrine of the 'holy, blissful martyr,' in the
Canterbury Cathedral. How better could this be done than by riding over
the ground made sacred by them on our tricycle?

And so it came to pass that one close, foggy morning, we strapped our bags
to our machine and wheeled out of Russell Square before any one was
stirring but the policeman, making his last rounds and trying door after
door. Down Holborn and past Staples' Kent, very grey and venerable in the
pale light, and where the facetious driver of a donkey-cart tried to race
us; past the now silent and deserted cloisters of Christ's Hospital, and
under Bow Bells in Cheapside; past the Monument of the famous fire, and
over London Bridge, where the mist was heavy on the river and the barges
showed spectre-like through it, and where hucksters greeted us after their
fashion, one crying, 'Go in, hind one! I bet on you. You'll catch up if
you try hard enough!' and another, 'How are you there, up in the second
story?' A short way up the Borough High Street, from which we had a
glimpse of the old red roof and balustraded galleries of the 'White Hart;'
and then we were at the corner where the 'Tabard' ought to be. This was to
have been our starting-point; but how, it suddenly occurred to us for the
first time, could we start from nothing? If ours had no beginning, would
it be a genuine pilgrimage? This was a serious difficulty at the very
outset. But our enthusiasm was fresh. We looked up at the old sign of
'Ye Old Tabard,' hanging from the third story of the tall brick building
which has replaced Chaucer's Inn. Here, at least, was something
substantial. And we rode on with what good cheer we could.

Then we went for some distance over the Old Kent Road, which is laid with
Belgian paving--invented, I think, for the confusion of cyclers, and where
in one place a Hansom cab blocked the way. In endeavouring to pass around
it our big wheel ran into the groove of the track, and we had to dismount
and lift it out. The driver sat scowling as he looked on. If he had his
way, he said, he would burn all them things. We came to Deptford, or
West Greenwich, at half-past seven, the very hour when mine host and his
fellows passed. So, in remembrance of them, we stopped a few minutes
opposite a little street full of old two-storied houses, with tiled roofs
and clustered chimney-pots and casement windows, overtopped by a distant
church steeple, its outline softened in the silvery mist, for the fog was
growing less as we journeyed onwards. At the corner was an Inn called the
'Fountain,' and as a man who talked with us while we rested there said
that an old fountain had stood in the open space near by, it pleased us to
think that here had been one of the Waterings of Saint Thomas where
pilgrims to the shrine made short halts, and that perhaps it was at this
very spot that Davy Copperfield, a modern pilgrim who travelled the same
road, had come to a stop in his flight from the young man with a
donkey-cart. A little way out of Deptford we came to Blackheath, where
sheep were peacefully grazing, rooks cawing overhead, and two or three
bicyclers racing, and where a woman stopped us to say that 'That's the
'ouse of Prince Harthur yander, and onst the Princess Sophia stayed in it
on her way to Woolwich,' and she pointed to the handsome brick house to
our left.

After Blackheath the mist vanished, and the sun, gladdened by the sweet
air, shone on the fields and woods, and the ugly barracks and pretty
cottages by which we wheeled. Red-coated soldiers turned to look and dogs
ran out to bark at us. In the meadows men and women leaned on their hoes
and rakes to stare. From tiny gardens, overflowing with roses and
sunflowers, children waved their delight. London was many miles behind
when, at a few minutes before nine, we drew up on the bridge at Crayford.

It seemed at first a sleepy little village. The only signs of life were on
the bridge. Here about a dozen men were smoking their morning pipes, and
as many boys were leaning over the wall, lazily staring into the river
below, or at the cool stretches of woodland and shady orchards on the
hillside beyond. But presently, as we waited, the village clock struck
nine, and at once the loud bell in the factory on the other side of the
little river Cray began to ring. One by one the older loungers knocked the
ashes from their pipes and passed through the gate. The boys lingered. But
their evil genius, in the shape of an old man in a tall white cap, came
out, and at his bidding they left the sunshine and the river and hurried
to work. A man with a cart full of shining onions went by, and we followed
him up a hilly street, where the gabled and timbered cottages seemed to be
trying to climb one over the other to reach a terrace of shining white
houses at the top. The first of these was but one-storied, and its tall
chimney-pot threw a soft blue shadow on the higher wall of the house next
to it. On a short strip of ground which stretched along the terrace
patches of cabbages alternated with luxuriant crops of weeds. In one place
there were stalks of pink hollyhock and poles covered with vines, and in
the windows above were scarlet geraniums. About them all there was a
feeling of warmth and light, more like Italy than England. J. took out his
sketch-book. Several women, startled by the novelty of strangers passing
by, had come out and were standing in their small gardens. When they saw
the sketch-book they posed as if for a photographer--all except one old
woman, who hobbled down the street, talking glibly. Perhaps it was as well
we did not hear what she said, for I think she was cursing us. When she
was close at our side and turned, waving her hands to the other women, she
looked like a great bird of ill-omen. 'Go in! go in!' she croaked: 'he's
takin' of yere likenesses. That's wot he's arter!' Her wrath still fell
upon us as we wheeled out of Crayford.

There were many pilgrims on the road; a few, like us, were on machines,
but the greater number were on foot. As in Chaucer's day, both rich and
poor go upon pilgrimage through Kent; but, whereas in his time there were
monasteries and hospitals by the way where the latter were taken in at
night, now they must find shelter under hedges or in dingles. Their lot,
however, did not seem hard. It is sweet to lie beneath the sky now as it
was when Daphnis sang. And the pilgrims whom we saw looked as if soft turf
was luxury compared to the beds they had just left, for they belonged to
the large army of hop-pickers who, every autumn, come from London to make
the Kentish roads unsafe after dark and the householder doubly watchful.

Whitechapel and other low quarters are nearly emptied at this season. It
is pleasant to know that at least once a-year these people escape from
their smoky, squalid streets, into green places where they can breathe
pure air, but their coming is not welcomed in the country. Many poor,
honest women in towns and villages thereabouts will rather lose a few
shillings than let their children go to the hop-fields during the picking
season, lest they should come away but too much wiser than they went. As
we rode further the number of tramps increased; all the morning we passed
and overtook them. There were grey-haired, decrepit men and women, who
hobbled painfully along, and could scarcely keep pace with their more
stalwart sons and daughters; there were children by the score, some of
whom ran gaily on, forgetting fatigue for joy of the sunshine; others
lagged behind, whimpering and weary; and still others were borne in their
mothers' arms. Almost all these people were laden with their household
goods and gods. They carried heavy bags thrown over their shoulders, or
else baskets and bundles slung on their arms, and pots and kettles and all
manner of household furniture. One man, more enterprising than the
others, had brought a push-cart; when we saw it, two babies, almost hidden
in a confused mass of clothing and pots and pans, were sleeping in it, and
one clasped a kitten in her arms. Now, with a sharp bend in the road, we
came suddenly upon a man sitting under a tree, who, though we rang our
bell right in his ear, never raised his eyes from a hole in an old silk
handkerchief he was holding; and now we came to a man and woman resting on
a pile of stones by the roadside, who sat upright at the tinkling of our
bell. I shall never forget the red and swarthy face of the woman as she
turned and looked at us, her black hair, coarse and straight as an
Indian's, hanging about her shoulders and over her eyes: she was
unmistakably young in years but old in vice, and ignorant of all save
evil--compared to hers an idiot's face would have been intelligent, a
brute's refined. I could now understand why honest countrywomen kept
their children from the hop-fields. As a rule, the tramps were as
careless and jolly as BÃ©ranger's Bohemians, and laughed and made merry as
if the world and its hardships were but jests. We, as figures in the
farce, came in for a share of their mirth. 'That's right! ladies fust!'
one old tattered and torn man called after us, gaily; 'that's the
principle on which I allus hacts!' Which, I suppose, is a rough way of
saying 'Place aux dames.' A very little joke went a great way with them.

'Clear the path!' another man cried to the women walking with him, as we
coasted down the hill outside of Dartford: 'ere's a lady and gen'leman on
a happaratus a-runnin' over us!' 'They're only a 'enjoyin' of 'emselves,'
an old hag of the party added; 'so let luck go wi' 'em!' Then she laughed
loud and long, and the others joined with her, and the sound of their
laughter still reached our ears as we came into the village.

Dartford, from a cycler's point of view, is a long narrow street between
two hills, one of which is good to coast, the other hard to climb. The
place, as we saw it, was full of hucksters and waggons, and footmen and
carriages, and we passed on without stopping, save by the river that runs
near a church, with a tower and an unconventional clock looking out from
one side instead of from the centre, which is the proper place for clocks.

From Dartford to Gravesend the road became more pleasant every minute.

Here and there were brown fields, where men were ploughing, or perhaps
burning heaps of stubble, and sending pale grey clouds of smoke
heavenwards; here and there were golden meadows where gleaners were busy,
and then, perhaps, a row of tall, dark poplars, or a patch of brilliant
cabbages. To the south, broad plains, where lazy, ease-loving cattle were
grazing, stretched as far as the eye could see. To the north, every now
and then, as the road turned, we saw the river, where ships were at
anchor, and steamers were steaming up to London, and black barges, with
dark-red sails, were floating down with the tide. The water was blue as
the sky, and the hills in the distance seemed to melt into a soft purple
mist hanging over them. By the road and by the river were many deep
deserted quarries, whose white chalk cliffs could be seen from afar, while
they brought out in strong contrast the red roofs of the cottages built at
their feet.