You will be given a section-wise evaluation report of a human-written text. Your task is to rate the entire text according to the evaluation criterion on a Likert scale from 1 to 5.
You are allowed to use half-points: [1, 1.5, 2, 2.5, 3, 3.5, 4, 4.5, 5]. Make sure you read and understand these instructions carefully.

# Task Description:
1. Before producing your output, follow these internal steps:
    a) Read and understand the text the report was created for.
    b) For each metric, analyze the section-wise report and detect recurring or serious problems that lead to point deduction. Each section includes scores and labeled issues for fluency and coherence.
    c) For each metric, summarize the most impactful problems across sections.
2. For each metric, give a score between 1 and 5. You are allowed to use half-points. You should refer to the requested metrics criteria and corresponding accuracy scales.
3. It is forbidden to generate any other opening, closing, and explanations.
4. It is forbidden to give corrections for detected issues.

# Evaluation Criterion and Metric Accuracy Scale:
## FLUENCY
**Definition**: Fluency assesses how the text reads from start to finish. It mainly focuses on syntax, grammar, spelling, word choice, phrasing, and punctuation of individual sentences. It ensures that the language flows smoothly without awkward phrasing or errors.
*Scale*:
- Score 5: Highly fluent, with clear, natural phrasing and minimal to no grammatical issues. Any errors, if present, are rare and do not distract from reading or understanding.
- Score 4: Mostly fluent and well-structured, though may contain minor issues in grammar or phrasing. These issues may be noticeable but do not disrupt the overall readability.
- Score 3: Generally readable and mostly fluent, but contains multiple grammatical or structural issues that interrupt the flow or clarity of the text in noticeable ways.
- Score 2: Text contains frequent grammatical errors, awkward phrasing, or confusing structure. Some segments are clear, but comprehension is often difficult without effort.
- Score 1: Largely unintelligible or fragmented. The text lacks coherent structure or meaning, making it very difficult or impossible to understand.

## COHERENCE
**Definition**: Coherence assesses how the story unfolds as a whole. Important criteria are logically sequenced, non-repetitive and smoothly connected ideas, a clear progression from one section to another, avoidance of ambiguities and abrupt jumps, and how consistent and clear structured the narrative is.
*Scale*:
- Score 5: Highly coherent, with a clear and logical progression throughout. Sentences and ideas connect smoothly to form a unified and well-organized whole. Minor lapses, if any, are barely noticeable and do not hinder understanding.
- Score 4: Mostly coherent, with a few weak or slightly disconnected parts. These do not significantly disrupt the flow or understanding of the text.
- Score 3: Generally coherent, but contains noticeable abrupt shifts, unclear transitions, or confusing segments that are not resolved and affect the reading experience.
- Score 2: The text has frequent inconsistencies, disconnected ideas, or illogical sequencing. Some parts may be understandable, but the overall coherence is difficult to follow without extra effort.
- Score 1: Largely incoherent. The text lacks logical structure or progression, with many disjointed, contradictory, or confusing segments that make understanding nearly impossible.

The text to be evaluated is given below:
Text: -One Common Faith-


CHAPTER: FOREWORD


At Ridván 2002, we addressed an open letter to the world's religious
leaders. Our action arose out of awareness that the disease of sectarian
hatreds, if not decisively checked, threatens harrowing consequences that
will leave few areas of the world unaffected. The letter acknowledged with
appreciation the achievements of the interfaith movement, to which Bahá'ís
have sought to contribute since an early point in the movement's
emergence. Nevertheless, we felt we must be forthright in saying that, if
the religious crisis is to be addressed as seriously as is occurring with
respect to other prejudices afflicting humankind, organized religion must
find within itself a comparable courage to rise above fixed conceptions
inherited from a distant past.

Above all, we expressed our conviction that the time has come when
religious leadership must face honestly and without further evasion the
implications of the truth that God is one and that, beyond all diversity
of cultural expression and human interpretation, religion is likewise one.

It was intimations of this truth that originally inspired the interfaith
movement and that have sustained it through the vicissitudes of the past
one hundred years. Far from challenging the validity of any of the great
revealed faiths, the principle has the capacity to ensure their continuing
relevance. In order to exert its influence, however, recognition of this
reality must operate at the heart of religious discourse, and it was with
this in mind that we felt that our letter should be explicit in
articulating it.

Response has been encouraging. Bahá'í institutions throughout the world
ensured that thousands of copies of the document were delivered to
influential figures in the major faith communities. While it was perhaps
not surprising that the message it contained was dismissed out of hand in
a few circles, Bahá'ís report that, in general, they were warmly welcomed.

Particularly affecting has been the obvious sincerity of many recipients'
distress over the failure of religious institutions to assist humanity in
dealing with challenges whose essential nature is spiritual and moral.

Discussions have turned readily to the need for fundamental change in the
way the believing masses of humankind relate to one another, and in a
significant number of instances, those receiving the letter have been
moved to reproduce and distribute it to other clerics in their respective
traditions. We feel hopeful that our initiative may serve as a catalyst
opening the way to new understanding of religion's purpose.

Lt. Col. Horace Porter, of Grant’s staff, was positive more than 30
years later that news of Sheridan’s success prompted the Union commander
in chief to issue the orders for the attack that carried the city.

If they are to respond to the need, Bahá'ís must draw on a deep
understanding of the process by which humanity's spiritual life evolves.

Bahá'u'lláh's writings provide insights that can help to elevate
discussion of religious issues above sectarian and transient
considerations. The responsibility to avail oneself of this spiritual
resource is inseparable from the gift of faith itself. "Religious
fanaticism and hatred", Bahá'u'lláh warns, "are a world-devouring fire,
whose violence none can quench. The Hand of Divine power can, alone,
deliver mankind from this desolating affliction...." Far from feeling
unsupported in their efforts to respond, Bahá'ís will come increasingly to
appreciate that the Cause they serve represents the arrowhead of an
awakening taking place among people everywhere, regardless of religious
background and indeed among many with no religious leaning.

Reflection on the challenge has prompted us to commission the commentary
that follows. One Common Faith, prepared under our supervision, reviews
relevant passages from both the writings of Bahá'u'lláh and the scriptures
of other faiths against the background of the contemporary crisis. We
commend it to the thoughtful study of the friends.


CHAPTER: "There is every reason for confidence that the period of history now..."


There is every reason for confidence that the period of history now
opening will be far more receptive to efforts to spread Bahá'u'lláh's
message than was the case in the century just ended. All the signs
indicate that a sea change in human consciousness is under way.

Early in the twentieth century, a materialistic interpretation of reality
had consolidated itself so completely as to become the dominant world
faith insofar as the direction of society was concerned. In the process,
the civilizing of human nature had been violently wrenched out of the
orbit it had followed for millennia. For many in the West, the Divine
authority that had functioned as the focal centre of guidance--however
diverse the interpretations of its nature--seemed simply to have dissolved
and vanished. In large measure, the individual was left free to maintain
whatever relationship he believed connected his life to a world
transcending material existence, but society as a whole proceeded with
growing confidence to sever dependence on a conception of the universe
that was judged to be at best a fiction and at worst an opiate, in either
case inhibiting progress. Humanity had taken its destiny into its own
hands. It had solved through rational experimentation and discourse--so
people were given to believe--all of the fundamental issues related to
human governance and development.

The body lay in state awhile in the Royal Academy, and was then taken to
St. Paul's Cathedral, and laid by the side of Sir Christopher Wren.

Throughout that part of the world where the vast majority of the earth's
population live, facile announcements that "God is Dead" had passed
largely unnoticed. The experience of the peoples of Africa, Asia, Latin
America and the Pacific had long confirmed them in the view not only that
human nature is deeply influenced by spiritual forces, but that its very
identity is spiritual. Consequently, religion continued, as had always
been the case, to function as the ultimate authority in life. These
convictions, while not directly confronted by the ideological revolution
taking place in the West, were effectively marginalized by it, insofar as
interaction among peoples and nations was concerned. Having penetrated and
captured all significant centres of power and information at the global
level, dogmatic materialism ensured that no competing voices would retain
the ability to challenge projects of world wide economic exploitation. To
the cultural damage already inflicted by two centuries of colonial rule
was added an agonizing disjunction between the inner and outer experience
of the masses affected, a condition invading virtually all aspects of
life. Helpless to exercise any real influence over the shaping of their
futures or even to preserve the moral well-being of their children, these
populations were plunged into a crisis different from but in many ways
even more devastating than the one gathering momentum in Europe and North
America. Although retaining its central role in consciousness, faith
appeared impotent to influence the course of events.

As the twentieth century approached its close, therefore, nothing seemed
less likely than a sudden resurgence of religion as a subject of consuming
global importance. Yet that is precisely what has now occurred in the form
of a groundswell of anxiety and discontent, much of it still only dimly
conscious of the sense of spiritual emptiness that is producing it.

Clothing consisted of fur caps, robes, shawls, ponchos, and capes of
animal skin with the hair either on or off the hide, and woven vegetable
fibers. Highly painted and fringed buckskin-sleeved shirts were worn by
the men. The women wore buckskin gowns or dresses, painted and fringed.

Beyond the attention that religion, as formally conceived, has begun to
command is a widespread revival of spiritual search. Expressed most
commonly as an urge to discover a personal identity that transcends the
merely physical, the development encourages a multitude of pursuits, both
positive and negative in character. On the one hand, the search for
justice and the promotion of the cause of international peace tend to have
the effect of also arousing new perceptions of the individual's role in
society. Similarly, although focused on the mobilization of support for
changes in social decision-making, movements like environmentalism and
feminism induce a re-examination of people's sense of themselves and of
their purpose in life. A reorientation occurring in all the major
religious communities is the accelerating migration of believers from
traditional branches of the parent faiths to sects that attach primary
importance to the spiritual search and personal experiences of their
members. At the opposite pole, extraterrestrial sightings,
"self-discovery" regimens, wilderness retreats, charismatic exaltation,
various New Age enthusiasms, and the consciousness-raising efficacy
attributed to narcotics and hallucinogens attract followings far larger
and more diverse than anything enjoyed by spiritualism or theosophy at a
similar historical turning point a century ago. For a Bahá'í, the
proliferation even of cults and practices that may arouse aversion in the
minds of many serves primarily as a reminder of the insight embodied in
the ancient tale of Majnún, who sifted the dust in his search for the
beloved Laylí, although aware that she was pure spirit: "I seek her
everywhere; haply somewhere I shall find her."

CHAPTER: "The reawakened interest in religion is clearly far from having
reached..."

The reawakened interest in religion is clearly far from having reached its
peak, in either its explicitly religious or its less definable spiritual
manifestations. On the contrary. The phenomenon is the product of
historical forces that steadily gather momentum. Their common effect is to
erode the certainty, bequeathed to the world by the twentieth century,
that material existence represents ultimate reality.

The most obvious cause of these re-evaluations has been the bankruptcy of
the materialist enterprise itself. For well over a hundred years, the idea
of progress was identified with economic development and with its capacity
to motivate and shape social improvement. Those differences of opinion
that existed did not challenge this world view, but only conceptions as to
how its goals might best be attained. Its most extreme form, the iron
dogma of "scientific materialism", sought to reinterpret every aspect of
history and human behaviour in its own narrow terms. Whatever humanitarian
ideals may have inspired some of its early proponents, the universal
consequence was to produce regimes of totalitarian control prepared to use
any means of coercion in regulating the lives of hapless populations
subjected to them. The goal held up as justification of such abuses was
the creation of a new kind of society that would ensure not only freedom
from want but fulfilment for the human spirit. At the end, after eight
decades of mounting folly and brutality, the movement collapsed as a
credible guide to the world's future.

Other systems of social experimentation, while repudiating recourse to
inhumane methods, nevertheless derived their moral and intellectual thrust
from the same limited conception of reality. The view took root that,
since people were essentially self-interested actors in matters pertaining
to their economic well-being, the building of just and prosperous
societies could be ensured by one or another scheme of what was described
as modernization. The closing decades of the twentieth century, however,
sagged under a mounting burden of evidence to the contrary: the breakdown
of family life, soaring crime, dysfunctional educational systems, and a
catalogue of other social pathologies that bring to mind the sombre words
of Bahá'u'lláh's warning about the impending condition of human society:
"Such shall be its plight, that to disclose it now would not be meet and
seemly."

The fate of what the world has learned to call social and economic
development has left no doubt that not even the most idealistic motives
can correct materialism's fundamental flaws. Born in the wake of the chaos
of the Second World War, "development" became by far the largest and most
ambitious collective undertaking on which the human race has ever
embarked. Its humanitarian motivation matched its enormous material and
technological investment. Fifty years later, while acknowledging the
impressive benefits development has brought, the enterprise must be
adjudged, by its own standards, a disheartening failure. Far from
narrowing the gap between the well-being of the small segment of the human
family who enjoy the benefits of modernity and the condition of the vast
populations mired in hopeless want, the collective effort that began with
such high hopes has seen the gap widen into an abyss.

Consumer culture, today's inheritor by default of materialism's gospel of
human betterment, is unembarrassed by the ephemeral nature of the goals
that inspire it. For the small minority of people who can afford them, the
benefits it offers are immediate, and the rationale unapologetic.

Emboldened by the breakdown of traditional morality, the advance of the
new creed is essentially no more than the triumph of animal impulse, as
instinctive and blind as appetite, released at long last from the
restraints of supernatural sanctions. Its most obvious casualty has been
language. Tendencies once universally castigated as moral failings mutate
into necessities of social progress. Selfishness becomes a prized
commercial resource; falsehood reinvents itself as public information;
perversions of various kinds unabashedly claim the status of civil rights.

Under appropriate euphemisms, greed, lust, indolence, pride--even
violence--acquire not merely broad acceptance but social and economic
value. Ironically, as words have been drained of meaning, so have the very
material comforts and acquisitions for which truth has been casually
sacrificed.

Clearly, materialism's error has lain not in the laudable effort to
improve the conditions of life, but in the narrowness of mind and
unjustified self-confidence that have defined its mission. The importance
both of material prosperity and of the scientific and technological
advances necessary to its achievement is a theme that runs through the
writings of the Bahá'í Faith. As was inevitable from the outset, however,
arbitrary efforts to disengage such physical and material well-being from
humanity's spiritual and moral development have ended by forfeiting the
allegiance of the very populations whose interests a materialistic culture
purports to serve. "Witness how the world is being afflicted with a fresh
calamity every day", Bahá'u'lláh warns. "Its sickness is approaching the
stage of utter hopelessness, inasmuch as the true Physician is debarred
from administering the remedy, whilst unskilled practitioners are regarded
with favour, and are accorded full freedom to act."


CHAPTER: "In addition to disillusionment with the promises of materialism, a..."


In addition to disillusionment with the promises of materialism, a force
of change undermining the misconceptions about reality that humanity
brought into the twenty-first century is global integration. At the
simplest level, it takes the form of advances in communication
technologies that open broad avenues of interaction among the planet's
diverse populations. Along with facilitating interpersonal and intersocial
exchanges, general access to information has the effect of transmuting the
cumulative learning of the ages, until recently the preserve of privileged
elites, into the patrimony of the entire human family, without distinction
of nation, race or culture. With all the gross inequities that global
integration perpetuates--indeed intensifies--no informed observer can fail
to acknowledge the stimulus to reflection about reality that such changes
have produced. With reflection has come a questioning of all established
authority, no longer merely that of religion and morality, but also of
government, academia, commerce, the media and, increasingly, scientific
opinion.

Apart from technological factors, unification of the planet is exerting
other, even more direct effects on thought. It would be impossible to
exaggerate, for example, the transformative impact on global consciousness
that has resulted from mass travel on an international scale. Greater
still have been the consequences of the enormous migrations that the world
has witnessed during the century and a half since the Báb declared His
mission. Millions of refugees fleeing from persecution have swept like
tidal waves back and forth across the European, African and Asiatic
continents, particularly. Amid the suffering such turmoil has caused, one
perceives the progressive integration of the world's races and cultures as
the citizenry of a single global homeland. As a result, people of every
background have been exposed to the cultures and norms of others about
whom their forefathers knew little or nothing, exciting a search for
meaning that cannot be evaded.

The next morning, before Lord Canterville went up to town, Mr. Otis had
an interview with him on the subject of the jewels the ghost had given
to Virginia. They were perfectly magnificent, especially a certain ruby
necklace with old Venetian setting, which was really a superb specimen
of sixteenth-century work, and their value was so great that Mr. Otis
felt considerable scruples about allowing his daughter to accept them.

But if Reason cannot always--as Bachya imagined--confirm tradition,
it can explain it historically. It can disentangle the lower strands
from the higher in that motley collection of national literature
which, extending over many generations of authorship, streaked with
strayed fragments of Aramaic, varying from the idyll of Ruth to the
apocalyptic dreams of Daniel, and deprived by Job and Ecclesiastes of
even a rambling epical unity, is naturally obnoxious to criticism when
put forward as one uniform Book, still more when put forward as
uniformly divine. For my part I am more lost in wonder over the people
that produced and preserved and the Synagogue that selected and
canonized so marvellous a literature, than dismayed because
occasionally amid the organ-music of its Miltons and Wordsworths
there is heard the primeval saga-note of heroic savagery.

Beneath all of the dislocation and suffering, the process is essentially a
spiritual one: "The breeze of the All-Merciful hath wafted, and the souls
have been quickened in the tombs of their bodies."

CHAPTER: "Throughout history, the primary agents of spiritual development have..."

Throughout history, the primary agents of spiritual development have been
the great religions. For the majority of the earth's people, the
scriptures of each of these systems of belief have served, in
Bahá'u'lláh's words, as "the City of God", a source of a knowledge that
totally embraces consciousness, one so compelling as to endow the sincere
with "a new eye, a new ear, a new heart, and a new mind". A vast
literature, to which all religious cultures have contributed, records the
experience of transcendence reported by generations of seekers. Down the
millennia, the lives of those who responded to intimations of the Divine
have inspired breathtaking achievements in music, architecture, and the
other arts, endlessly replicating the soul's experience for millions of
their fellow believers. No other force in existence has been able to
elicit from people comparable qualities of heroism, self-sacrifice and
self-discipline. At the social level, the resulting moral principles have
repeatedly translated themselves into universal codes of law, regulating
and elevating human relationships. Viewed in perspective, the major
religions emerge as the primary driving forces of the civilizing process.

To argue otherwise is surely to ignore the evidence of history.

Why, then, does this immensely rich heritage not serve as the central
stage for today's reawakening of spiritual quest? On the periphery,
earnest attempts are being made to reformulate the teachings that gave
rise to the respective faiths, in the hope of imbuing them with new
appeal, but the greater part of the search for meaning is diffused,
individualistic and incoherent in character. The scriptures have not
changed; the moral principles they contain have lost none of their
validity. No one who sincerely poses questions to Heaven, if he persists,
will fail to detect an answering voice in the Psalms or in the Upanishads.

Anyone with some intimation of the Reality that transcends this material
one will be touched to the heart by the words in which Jesus or Buddha
speaks so intimately of it. The Qur'án's apocalyptic visions continue to
provide compelling assurance to its readers that the realization of
justice is central to the Divine purpose. Nor, in their essential
features, do the lives of heroes and saints seem any less meaningful than
they did when those lives were lived centuries ago. For many religious
people, therefore, the most painful aspect of the current crisis of
civilization is that the search for truth has not turned with confidence
into religion's familiar avenues.

The problem is, of course, twofold. The rational soul does not merely
occupy a private sphere, but is an active participant in a social order.

Although the received truths of the great faiths remain valid, the daily
experience of an individual in the twenty-first century is unimaginably
removed from the one that he or she would have known in any of those ages
when this guidance was revealed. Democratic decision-making has
fundamentally altered the relationship of the individual to authority.

With growing confidence and growing success, women justly insist on their
right to full equality with men. Revolutions in science and technology
change not only the functioning but the conception of society, indeed of
existence itself. Universal education and an explosion of new fields of
creativity open the way to insights that stimulate social mobility and
integration, and create opportunities of which the rule of law encourages
the citizen to take full advantage. Stem cell research, nuclear energy,
sexual identity, ecological stress and the use of wealth raise, at the
very least, social questions that have no precedent. These, and the
countless other changes affecting every aspect of human life, have brought
into being a new world of daily choices for both society and its members.

What has not changed is the inescapable requirement of making such
choices, whether for better or worse. It is here that the spiritual nature
of the contemporary crisis comes into sharpest focus because most of the
decisions called for are not merely practical but moral. In large part,
therefore, loss of faith in traditional religion has been an inevitable
consequence of failure to discover in it the guidance required to live
with modernity, successfully and with assurance.

“But Adolphe cannot always stay away,” Madame Bauche had pleaded in her
difficulty.  The truth of this the capitaine had admitted; but Marie, he
said, might be married to some one else before two years were over.  And
so the matter had commenced.

Inevitably, with such approaches comes a questioning of religious
doctrines that inhibit association and understanding. If people whose
beliefs appear to be fundamentally different from one's own nevertheless
live moral lives that deserve admiration, what is it that makes one's own
faith superior to theirs? Alternatively, if all of the great religions
share certain basic values in common, do not sectarian attachments run the
risk of merely reinforcing unwanted barriers between an individual and his
neighbours?

In the prevailing alienation of humanity from God over the past century, a
relationship on which the fabric of moral life itself depends has broken
down. Natural faculties of the rational soul, vital to the development and
maintenance of human values, have become universally discounted:
The vitality of men’s belief in God is dying out in every land; nothing
short of His wholesome medicine can ever restore it. The corrosion of
ungodliness is eating into the vitals of human society; what else but the
Elixir of His potent Revelation can cleanse and revive it?... The Word of
God, alone, can claim the distinction of being endowed with the capacity
required for so great and far-reaching a change.

CHAPTER: "The dilemma is both artificial and self-inflicted. The world order,
if..."

The dilemma is both artificial and self-inflicted. The world order, if it
can be so described, within which Bahá'ís today pursue the work of sharing
Bahá'u'lláh's message is one whose misconceptions about both human nature
and social evolution are so fundamental as to severely inhibit the most
intelligent and well-intentioned endeavours at human betterment.

Particularly is this true with respect to the confusion that surrounds
virtually every aspect of the subject of religion. In order to respond
adequately to the spiritual needs of their neighbours, Bahá'ís will have
to gain an in-depth understanding of the issues involved. The effort of
imagination this challenge requires can be appreciated from the advice
that is perhaps the most frequently and urgently reiterated admonition in
the writings of their Faith: to "meditate", to "ponder", to "reflect".

A commonplace of popular discourse is that by "religion" is intended the
multitude of sects currently in existence. Not surprisingly, such a
suggestion at once arouses protest in other quarters that by religion is
intended rather one or another of the great, independent belief systems of
history that have shaped and inspired whole civilizations. This point of
view, in turn, however, runs up against the inevitable query as to where
one will find these historic faiths in the contemporary world. Where,
precisely, are "Judaism", "Buddhism", "Christianity", "Islám" and the
others, since they obviously cannot be identified with the irreconcilably
opposed organizations that purport to speak authoritatively in their
names? Nor does the problem end there. Yet another response to the enquiry
will almost certainly be that by religion is intended simply an attitude
to life, a sense of relationship with a Reality that transcends material
existence. Religion, so conceived, is an attribute of the individual
person, an impulse not susceptible of organization, an experience
universally available. Again, however, such an orientation will be seen by
a majority of religiously minded persons as lacking the very authority of
self-discipline and the unifying effect that give religion meaning. Some
objectors would even argue that, on the contrary, religion signifies the
lifestyle of persons who, like themselves, have adopted severe regimens of
daily ritual and self-denial that set them entirely apart from the rest of
society. What all such differing conceptions have in common is the extent
to which a phenomenon that is acknowledged to completely transcend human
reach has nevertheless gradually been imprisoned within conceptual
limits--whether organizational, theological, experiential or ritualistic--of
human invention.

The teachings of Bahá'u'lláh cut through this tangle of inconsistent views
and, in doing so, reformulate many truths which, whether explicitly or
implicitly, have lain at the heart of all Divine revelation. Although in
no way a comprehensive reading of His intent, Bahá'u'lláh makes it clear
that attempts to capture or suggest the Reality of God in catechisms and
creeds are exercises in self-deception: "To every discerning and illumined
heart it is evident that God, the unknowable Essence, the divine Being, is
immensely exalted beyond every human attribute, such as corporeal
existence, ascent and descent, egress and regress. Far be it from His
glory that human tongue should adequately recount His praise, or that
human heart comprehend His fathomless mystery." The instrumentality
through which the Creator of all things interacts with the ever-evolving
creation He has brought into being is the appearance of prophetic Figures
who manifest the attributes of an inaccessible Divinity: "The door of the
knowledge of the Ancient of Days being thus closed in the face of all
beings, the Source of infinite grace ... hath caused those luminous Gems
of Holiness to appear out of the realm of the spirit, in the noble form of
the human temple, and be made manifest unto all men, that they may impart
unto the world the mysteries of the unchangeable Being, and tell of the
subtleties of His imperishable Essence."

To presume to judge among the Messengers of God, exalting one above the
other, would be to give in to the delusion that the Eternal and
All-Embracing is subject to the vagaries of human preference. "It is clear
and evident to thee", are Bahá'u'lláh's precise words, "that all the
Prophets are the Temples of the Cause of God, Who have appeared clothed in
divers attire. If thou wilt observe with discriminating eyes, thou wilt
behold Them all abiding in the same tabernacle, soaring in the same
heaven, seated upon the same throne, uttering the same speech, and
proclaiming the same Faith." To imagine, further, that the nature of
these unique Figures can be--or needs to be--encompassed within theories
borrowed from physical experience is equally presumptuous. What is meant
by "knowledge of God", Bahá'u'lláh explains, is knowledge of the
Manifestations Who reveal His will and attributes, and it is here that the
soul comes into intimate association with a Creator Who is otherwise
beyond both language and apprehension: "I bear witness", is Bahá'u'lláh's
assertion about the station of the Manifestation of God, "...that through
Thy beauty the beauty of the Adored One hath been unveiled, and through
Thy face the face of the Desired One hath shone forth...."

Later that day, but still two hours before nightfall, Ramar Chind
arrived with a small crew of three Security Police. He had selected his
men carefully: they knew how to handle a spaceship, they knew how to
fight, they were quite ruthless. He thought Garr Symm would be pleased.

As humanity's purpose includes the carrying forward of "an ever-advancing
civilization", not the least of the extraordinary powers that religion
possesses has been its ability to free those who believe from the
limitations of time itself, eliciting from them sacrifices on behalf of
generations centuries into the future. Indeed, because the soul is
immortal, its awakening to its true nature empowers it, not only in this
world but even more directly in those worlds that lie beyond, to serve the
evolutionary process: "The light which these souls radiate", Bahá'u'lláh
asserts, "is responsible for the progress of the world and the advancement
of its peoples.... All things must needs have a cause, a motive power, an
animating principle. These souls and symbols of detachment have provided,
and will continue to provide, the supreme moving impulse in the world of
being."

Belief is thus a necessary and inextinguishable urge of the species that
has been described by an influential modern thinker as "evolution become
conscious of itself". If, as the events of the twentieth century
provide sad and compelling evidence, the natural expression of faith is
artificially blocked, it will invent objects of worship however
unworthy--or even debased--that may in some measure appease the yearning for
certitude. It is an impulse that will not be denied.

In short, through the ongoing process of revelation, the One Who is the
Source of the system of knowledge we call religion demonstrates that
system's integrity and its freedom from the contradictions imposed by
sectarian ambitions. The work of each Manifestation of God has an autonomy
and an authority that transcend appraisal; it is also a stage in the
limitless unfolding of a single Reality. Because the purpose of the
successive revelations of God is the awakening of humankind to its
capacities and responsibilities as the trustee of creation, the process is
not simply repetitive, but progressive, and is fully appreciated only when
perceived in this context.

The great initial 'S' I claim to be one of the very best printers'
ornaments ever made, one which would not disgrace a thirteenth century
MS. Adam and Eve are standing on a finely-designed spray of poppy-like
leafage, and behind them rise up the boughs of the tree. Eve reaches
down an apple to Adam with her right hand, and with her uplifted left
takes another from the mouth of the crowned woman's head of the
serpent, whose coils, after they have performed the duty of making the
S, end in a foliage scroll, whose branches enclose little medallions
of the seven deadly sins. All this is done with admirable invention
and romantic meaning, and with very great beauty of design and a full
sense of decorative necessities.

The recurring proof of the existence of God, therefore, is that from time
immemorial He has repeatedly manifested Himself. In the larger sense, as
Bahá'u'lláh explains, the vast epic of humanity's religious history
represents the fulfilment of the "Covenant", the enduring promise by which
the Creator of all things assures the race of the unfailing guidance
essential to its spiritual and moral development, and calls on it to
internalize and give expression to these values. One is free to dispute
through historicist interpretations of the evidence the unique role of
this or that Messenger of God, if that is one's purpose, but such
speculation is of no help in accounting for developments that have
transformed thought and produced changes in human relationships critical
to social evolution. At intervals so rare that the known instances can be
counted on one's fingers, the Manifestations of God have appeared, have
each been explicit as to the authority of His teachings and have each
exerted an influence on the advance of civilization incomparably beyond
that of any other phenomenon in history. "Consider the hour at which the
supreme Manifestation of God revealeth Himself unto men", Bahá'u'lláh
points out: "Ere that hour cometh, the Ancient Being, Who is still unknown
of men and hath not as yet given utterance to the Word of God, is Himself
the All-Knower in a world devoid of any man that hath known Him. He is
indeed the Creator without a creation."


CHAPTER: "The objection most commonly raised against the foregoing conception..."

Russia, Prussia, and Austria, acting together, were not to be resisted.

Chiefly, however, such an objection offers Bahá'ís an invitation to set
the principles reviewed here more explicitly in the evolutionary context
provided in Bahá'u'lláh's writings.

The differences referred to fall into the categories of either practice or
doctrine, both of them presented as the intent of the relevant scriptures.

In the case of religious customs governing personal life, it is helpful to
view the subject against the background of comparable features of material
life. It is most unlikely that diversity in hygiene, dress, medicine,
diet, transportation, warfare, construction or economic activity, however
striking, would any longer be seriously advanced in support of a theory
that humanity does not in fact constitute one people, single and unique.

Until the opening of the twentieth century, such simplistic arguments were
commonplace, but historical and anthropological research now provides a
seamless panorama of the process of cultural evolution by which these and
countless other expressions of human creativity came into existence, were
transmitted through successive generations, underwent gradual
metamorphoses and often spread to enrich the lives of peoples in far
distant lands. That present-day societies represent a wide spectrum of
such phenomena, therefore, does not in any way define a fixed and
immutable identity of the peoples concerned, but merely distinguishes the
stage through which given groups are--or at least until recently have
been--passing. Even so, all such cultural expressions are now in a state of
fluidity in consequence of the pressures of planetary integration.

The milk had a good taste and a high percentage of fat. The sheep
seemed larger than those of the other nomadic tribes in Tienshan and
were not of the fat-tailed breed. -- The horses were small, fairly
well proportioned, and strong, but not handsome. Most of them were
knock-kneed. -- The dogs were chiefly Tangutan, large, dark-brown,
long-haired, very fine animals. -- The Yögurs complained of their many
sufferings during the protracted Dungan revolt, especially of their
loss of cattle, and that since that time they had never regained the
same degree of prosperity.

To argue, therefore, that differences of regulations, observances and
other practices constitute any significant objection to the idea of
revealed religion's essential oneness is to miss the purpose that these
prescriptions served. More seriously, it misses the fundamental
distinction between the eternal and the transitory features of religion's
function. The essential message of religion is immutable. It is, in
Bahá'u'lláh's words, "the changeless Faith of God, eternal in the past,
eternal in the future". Its role in opening the way for the soul to
enter into an evermore mature relationship with its Creator--and in
endowing it with an ever-greater measure of moral autonomy in disciplining
the animal impulses of human nature--is not at all irreconcilable with its
providing auxiliary guidance that enhances the process of civilization
building.

The concept of progressive revelation places the ultimate emphasis on
recognition of the revelation of God at its appearance. The failure of the
generality of humankind in this respect has, time and again, condemned
entire populations to a ritualistic repetition of ordinances and practices
long after these latter have fulfilled their purpose and now merely
stultify moral advance. Sadly, in the present day, a related consequence
of such failure has been to trivialize religion. At precisely the point in
its collective development where humanity began to struggle with the
challenges of modernity, the spiritual resource on which it had
principally depended for moral courage and enlightenment was fast becoming
a subject of mockery, first at those levels where decisions were being
made about the direction society should take, and eventually in
ever-widening circles of the general population. There is little cause for
surprise, then, that this most devastating of the many betrayals of trust
from which human confidence has suffered should, in the course of time,
undermine the foundations of belief itself. So it is that Bahá'u'lláh
repeatedly urges His readers to think deeply about the lesson taught by
such repeated failures:

"Ponder for a moment, and reflect upon that which has been the cause of such denial...."

"What could have been the reason for such denial and avoidance...?"

"What could have caused such contention...?"

"Reflect, what could have been the motive...?"

More detrimental still to religious understanding has been theological
presumption. A persistent feature of religion's sectarian past has been
the dominant role played by clergy. In the absence of scriptural texts
that established unarguable institutional authority, clerical elites
succeeded in arrogating to themselves exclusive control over
interpretation of the Divine intent. However diverse the motives, the
tragic effects have been to impede the current of inspiration, discourage
independent intellectual activity, focus attention on the minutiae of
rituals and too often engender hatred and prejudice towards those
following a different sectarian path from that of self-appointed spiritual
leaders. While nothing could prevent the creative power of Divine
intervention from continuing its work of progressively raising
consciousness, the scope of what could be achieved, in any age, became
increasingly limited by such artificially contrived obstacles.

Over time, theology succeeded in constructing in the heart of each one of
the great faiths an authority parallel with, and even inimical in spirit
to, the revealed teachings on which the tradition was based. Jesus'
familiar parable of the landowner who sowed seed in his field addresses
both the issue and its implications for the present time:

"But while men slept, his enemy came and sowed tares among the wheat, and
went his way."

When his servants proposed to uproot them, the landowner
replied, "Nay; lest while ye gather up the tares, ye root up also the
wheat with them. Let both grow together until the harvest: and in the time
of harvest I will say to the reapers, Gather ye together first the tares,
and bind them in bundles to burn them: but gather the wheat into my
barn."

Throughout its pages, the Qur'án reserves its severest
condemnation for the spiritual harm caused by this competing hegemony:

"Say: The things that my Lord hath indeed forbidden are: shameful deeds,
whether open or secret; sins and trespasses against truth or reason;
assigning of partners to God, for which he hath given no authority; and
saying things about God of which ye have no knowledge." To the modern
mind it is the greatest of ironies that generations of theologians, whose
impositions on religion embody precisely the betrayal so strongly
denounced in these texts, should seek to use the warning itself as a
weapon in suppressing protest against their usurpation of Divine
authority.

In effect, each new stage in the progressively unfolding revelation of
spiritual truth was frozen in time and in an array of literalistic images
and interpretations, many of them borrowed from cultures which were
themselves morally exhausted. Whatever their value at earlier stages in
the evolution of consciousness, conceptions of physical resurrection, a
paradise of carnal delights, reincarnation, pantheistic prodigies, and the
like, today raise walls of separation and conflict in an age when the
earth has literally become one homeland and human beings must learn to see
themselves as its citizens. In this context one can appreciate the reasons
for the vehemence of Bahá'u'lláh's warnings about the barriers that
dogmatic theology creates in the path of those seeking to understand the
will of God: "O leaders of religion! Weigh not the Book of God with such
standards and sciences as are current amongst you, for the Book itself is
the unerring Balance established amongst men." In His Tablet to Pope
Pius IX, He advises the pontiff that God has in this day "stored away ...
in the vessels of justice" whatever is enduring in religion and "cast into
fire that which befitteth it".


CHAPTER: "Freed from the thickets with which theology has hedged religious..."


Freed from the thickets with which theology has hedged religious
understanding about, the mind is able to explore familiar scriptural
passages through the eyes of Bahá'u'lláh. "Peerless is this Day," He
asserts, "for it is as the eye to past ages and centuries, and as a light
unto the darkness of the times." The most striking observation that
results from taking advantage of this perspective is the unity of purpose
and principle running throughout the Hebrew scriptures, the Gospel and the
Qur'án, particularly, although echoes can readily be discerned in the
scriptures of others among the world's religions. Repeatedly, the same
organizing themes emerge from the matrix of precept, exhortation,
narrative, symbolism and interpretation in which they are set. Of these
foundational truths, by far the most distinctive is the progressive
articulation and emphatic assertion of the oneness of God, Creator of all
existence whether of the phenomenal world or of those realms that
transcend it. "I am the Lord," the Bible declares, "and there is none
else, there is no God beside me", and the same conception underpins
the later teachings of Christ and Muhammad.

Humanity--focal point, inheritor and trustee of the world--exists to know
its Creator and to serve His purpose. In its highest expression, the
innate human impulse to respond takes the form of worship, a condition
entailing wholehearted submission to a power that is recognized as
deserving of such homage. "Now unto the King eternal, immortal, invisible,
the only wise God, be honour and glory for ever and ever." Inseparable
from the spirit of reverence itself is its expression in service to the
Divine purpose for humankind. "Say: All bounties are in the hand of God:
He granteth them to whom He pleaseth: and God careth for all, and He
knoweth all things." Illumined by this understanding, the
responsibilities of humanity are clear: "It is not righteousness that ye
turn your faces towards East or West", the Qur'án states, "but it is
righteousness--to believe in God ... to spend of your substance, out of
love for Him, for your kin, for orphans, for the needy, for the wayfarer,
for those who ask...."

"Ye are the salt of the earth", Christ impresses on those who respond to His
call.

"Ye are the light of the world."

Summarizing a theme that recurs time and again throughout the
Hebrew scriptures and will subsequently reappear in the Gospel and the
Qur'án, the prophet Micah asks, "...what doth the Lord require of thee,
but to do justly, and to love mercy, and to walk humbly with thy God?"

There is equal agreement in these texts that the soul's ability to attain
to an understanding of its Creator's purpose is the product not merely of
its own effort, but of interventions of the Divine that open the way. The
point was made with memorable clarity by Jesus: "I am the way, the truth,
and the life: no man cometh unto the Father, but by me." If one is not
to see in this assertion merely a dogmatic challenge to other stages of
the one ongoing process of Divine guidance, it is obviously the expression
of the central truth of revealed religion: that access to the unknowable
Reality that creates and sustains existence is possible only through
awakening to the illumination shed from that Realm. One of the most
cherished of the Qur'án's surihs takes up the metaphor: "God is the Light
of the heavens and the earth.... Light upon Light! God doth guide whom He
will to His Light." In the case of the Hebrew prophets, the Divine
intermediary that was later to appear in Christianity in the person of the
Son of Man and in Islám as the Book of God assumed the form of a binding
Covenant established by the Creator with Abraham, Patriarch and Prophet:
"And I will establish my covenant between me and thee and thy seed after
thee in their generations for an everlasting covenant, to be a God unto
thee, and to thy seed after thee."

The succession of revelations of the Divine also appears as an
implicit--and usually explicit--feature of all the major faiths. One of its
earliest and clearest expressions occurs in the Bhagavad-Gita: "I come,
and go, and come. When Righteousness declines, O Bharata! When Wickedness
is strong, I rise, from age to age, and take visible shape, and move a man
with men, succouring the good, thrusting the evil back, and setting Virtue
on her seat again." This ongoing drama constitutes the basic structure
of the Bible, whose sequence of books recounts the missions not only of
Abraham and of Moses--"whom the Lord knew face to face"--but of the line
of lesser prophets who developed and consolidated the work that these
primary Authors of the process had set in motion. Similarly, no amount of
contentious and fantastical speculation about the precise nature of Jesus
could succeed in separating His mission from the transformative influence
exerted on the course of civilization by the work of Abraham and Moses. He
Himself warns that it is not He Who will condemn those who reject the
message He bears, but Moses "in whom ye trust. For had ye believed Moses,
ye would have believed me: for he wrote of me. But if ye believe not his
writings, how shall ye believe my words?" With the revelation of the
Qur'án, the theme of the succession of the Messengers of God becomes
central: "We believe in God, and the revelation given to us, and to
Abraham, Isma'il, Isaac, Jacob ... and that given to Moses and Jesus, and
that given to (all) Prophets from their Lord...."

For a sympathetic and objective reader of such passages what emerges is a
recognition of the essential oneness of religion. So it is that the term
"Islám" (literally "submission" to God) designates not merely the
particular dispensation of Providence inaugurated by Muhammad but, as the
words of the Qur'án make unmistakably clear, religion itself. While it is
true to speak of the unity of all religions, understanding of the context
is vital. At the deepest level, as Bahá'u'lláh emphasizes, there is but
one religion. Religion is religion, as science is science. The one
discerns and articulates the values unfolding progressively through Divine
revelation; the other is the instrumentality through which the human mind
explores and is able to exert its influence ever more precisely over the
phenomenal world. The one defines goals that serve the evolutionary
process; the other assists in their attainment. Together, they constitute
the dual knowledge system impelling the advance of civilization. Each is
hailed by the Master as an "effulgence of the Sun of Truth".

It is, therefore, an inadequate recognition of the unique station of
Moses, Buddha, Zoroaster, Jesus, Muhammad--or of the succession of Avatars
who inspired the Hindu scriptures--to depict their work as the founding of
distinct religions. Rather are they appreciated when acknowledged as the
spiritual Educators of history, as the animating forces in the rise of the
civilizations through which consciousness has flowered: "He was in the
world," the Gospel declares, "and the world was made by him...." That
their persons have been held in a reverence infinitely above those of any
other historical figures reflects the attempt to articulate otherwise
inexpressible feelings aroused in the hearts of unnumbered millions of
people by the blessings their work has conferred. In loving them humanity
has progressively learned what it means to love God. There is,
realistically, no other way to do so. They are not honoured by fumbling
efforts to capture the essential mystery of their nature in dogmas
invented by human imagination; what honours them is the soul's
unconditioned surrender of its will to the transformative influence they
mediate.


CHAPTER: "Confusion about the role of religion in cultivating moral..."


Confusion about the role of religion in cultivating moral consciousness is
equally apparent in popular understanding of its contribution to the
shaping of society. Perhaps the most obvious example is the inferior
social status most sacred texts assign to women. While the resulting
benefits enjoyed by men were no doubt a major factor in consolidating such
a conception, moral justification was unquestionably supplied by people's
understanding of the intent of the scriptures themselves. With few
exceptions, these texts address themselves to men, assigning to women a
supportive and subordinate role in the life of both religion and society.

Sadly, such understanding made it deplorably easy to attach primary blame
to women for failure in the disciplining of the sexual impulse, a vital
feature of moral advancement. In a modern frame of reference, attitudes of
this kind are readily recognized as prejudiced and unjust. At the stages
of social development at which all of the major faiths came into
existence, scriptural guidance sought primarily to civilize, to the extent
possible, relationships resulting from intractable historical
circumstances. It needs little insight to appreciate that clinging to
primitive norms in the present day would defeat the very purpose of
religion's patient cultivation of moral sense.

Comparable considerations have pertained in relations between societies.

The long and arduous preparation of the Hebrew people for the mission
required of them is an illustration of the complexity and stubborn
character of the moral challenges involved. In order that the spiritual
capacities appealed to by the prophets might awaken and flourish, the
inducements offered by neighbouring idolatrous cultures had, at all costs,
to be resisted. Scriptural accounts of the condign punishments that befell
both rulers and subjects who violated the principle illustrated the
importance attached to it by the Divine purpose. A somewhat comparable
issue arose in the struggle of the newborn community founded by Muhammad
to survive attempts by pagan Arab tribes to extinguish it--and in the
barbaric cruelty and relentless spirit of vendetta animating the
attackers. No one familiar with the historical details will have
difficulty in understanding the severity of the Qur'án's injunctions on
the subject. While the monotheistic beliefs of Jews and Christians were to
be accorded respect, no compromise with idolatry was permitted. In a
relatively brief space of time, this draconian rule had succeeded in
unifying the tribes of the Arabian Peninsula and launching the newly
forged community on well over five centuries of moral, intellectual,
cultural and economic achievement, unmatched before or since in the speed
and scope of its expansion. History tends to be a stern judge. Ultimately,
in its uncompromising perspective, the consequences to those who would
have blindly strangled such enterprises in the cradle will always be set
off against the benefits accruing to the world as a whole from the triumph
of the Bible's vision of human possibilities and the advances made
possible by the genius of Islamic civilization.

Among the most contentious of such issues in understanding society's
evolution towards spiritual maturity has been that of crime and
punishment. While different in detail and degree, the penalties prescribed
by most sacred texts for acts of violence against either the commonweal or
the rights of other individuals tended to be harsh. Moreover, they
frequently extended to permitting retaliation against the offenders by the
injured parties or by members of their families. In the perspective of
history, however, one may reasonably ask what practical alternatives
existed. In the absence not merely of present-day programmes of
behavioural modification, but even of recourse to such coercive options as
prisons and policing agencies, religion's concern was to impress indelibly
on general consciousness the moral unacceptability--and practical costs--of
conduct whose effect would otherwise have been to demoralize efforts at
social progress. The whole of civilization has since been the beneficiary,
and it would be less than honest not to acknowledge the fact.

So it has been throughout all of the religious dispensations whose origins
have survived in written records. Mendicancy, slavery, autocracy,
conquest, ethnic prejudices and other undesirable features of social
interaction have gone unchallenged--or been explicitly indulged--as religion
sought to achieve reformations of behaviour that were considered more
immediately essential at given stages in the advance of civilization. To
condemn religion because any one of its successive dispensations failed to
address the whole range of social wrongs would be to ignore everything
that has been learned about the nature of human development. Inevitably,
anachronistic thinking of this kind must also create severe psychological
handicaps in appreciating and facing the requirements of one's own time.

The issue is not the past, but the implications for the present. Problems
arise where followers of one of the world's faiths prove unable to
distinguish between its eternal and transitory features, and attempt to
impose on society rules of behaviour that have long since accomplished
their purpose. The principle is fundamental to an understanding of
religion's social role: "The remedy the world needeth in its present-day
afflictions can never be the same as that which a subsequent age may
require", Bahá'u'lláh points out. "Be anxiously concerned with the needs
of the age ye live in, and centre your deliberations on its exigencies and
requirements."


CHAPTER: "The exigencies of the new age of human experience to which..."


The exigencies of the new age of human experience to which Bahá'u'lláh
summoned the political and religious rulers of the nineteenth century
world have now been largely adopted, at least as ideals, by their
successors and by progressive minds everywhere. By the time the twentieth
century had drawn to a close, principles that had, only short decades
earlier, been patronized as visionary and hopelessly unrealistic had
become central to global discourse. Buttressed by the findings of
scientific research and the conclusions of influential commissions--often
lavishly funded--they direct the work of powerful agencies at
international, national and local levels. A vast body of scholarly
literature in many languages is devoted to exploring practical means for
their implementation, and those programmes can count on media attention on
five continents.

Most of these principles are, alas, also widely flouted, not only among
recognized enemies of social peace, but in circles professedly committed
to them. What is lacking is not convincing testimony as to their
relevance, but the power of moral conviction that can implement them, a
power whose only demonstrably reliable source throughout history has been
religious faith. As late as the inception of Bahá'u'lláh's own mission,
religious authority still exercised a significant degree of social
influence. When the Christian world was moved to break with millennia of
unquestioning conviction and address at last the evil of slavery, it was
to Biblical ideals that the early British reformers sought to appeal.

Subsequently, in the defining address he gave regarding the central role
played by the issue in the great conflict in America, the president of the
United States warned that if "every drop of blood drawn with the lash
shall be paid by another drawn with the sword, as was said three thousand
years ago, so still it must be said 'the judgements of the Lord are true
and righteous altogether'." That era, however, was swiftly drawing to
a close. In the upheavals that followed the Second World War, even so
influential a figure as Mohandas Gandhi proved unable to mobilize the
spiritual power of Hinduism in support of his efforts to extinguish
sectarian violence on the Indian subcontinent. Nor were leaders of the
Islamic community any more effective in this respect. As prefigured in the
Qur'án's metaphorical vision of "The Day that We roll up the heavens like
a scroll", the once unchallengeable authority of the traditional
religions had ceased to direct humanity's social relations.

It is in this context that one begins to appreciate Bahá'u'lláh's choice
of imagery about the will of God for a new age: "Think not that We have
revealed unto you a mere code of laws. Nay, rather, We have unsealed the
choice Wine with the fingers of might and power." Through His
revelation, the principles required for the collective coming of age of
the human race have been invested with the one power capable of
penetrating to the roots of human motivation and of altering behaviour.

For those who have recognized Him, equality of men and women is not a
sociological postulate, but revealed truth about human nature, with
implications for every aspect of human relations. The same is true of His
teaching of the principle of racial oneness. Universal education, freedom
of thought, the protection of human rights, recognition of the earth's
vast resources as a trust for the whole of humankind, society's
responsibility for the well-being of its citizenry, the promotion of
scientific research, even so practical a principle as an international
auxiliary language that will advance integration of the earth's
peoples--for all who respond to Bahá'u'lláh's revelation, these and similar
precepts carry the same compelling authority as do the injunctions of
scripture against idolatry, theft and false witness. While intimations of
some can be perceived in earlier sacred writings, their definition and
prescription had necessarily to wait until the planet's heterogeneous
populations could set out together on the discovery of their nature as a
single human race. Through spiritual empowerment brought by Bahá'u'lláh's
revelation the Divine standards can be appreciated, not as isolated
principles and laws, but as facets of a single, all-embracing vision of
humanity's future, revolutionary in purpose, intoxicating in the
possibilities it opens.

For a while only. For just as, out of the blood and terror of the
Revolution, a real France arose, phnix-wise, from the ruin, and in
being born, whilst putting off the vilenesses of the thing from which
she sprang, took on also to herself the gracious and winsome qualities
that place her amongst the most fascinating peoples of the ages; so
Boucher has come into his kingdom again--the most gracious of painters
that the years have yielded.

Significantly, Bahá'u'lláh attributes to this system, once established,
the right to suppress by force acts of aggression by one state against
another. Addressing the rulers of His day, He asserts the clear moral
authority of such action: "Should any one among you take up arms against
another, rise ye all against him, for this is naught but manifest
justice."


CHAPTER: "The power through which these goals will be progressively realized is..."

And in a few minutes there was a strange, buzzing sound down cellar,
that kept time to the hum of Madame Bettina’s tiny sewing-machine
upstairs. For it was Madame Bettina that had to make the sheets and
pillow-cases and net curtains, and all the things which are hardly in a
carpenter’s line.

Unity is a condition of the human spirit. Education can support and
enhance it, as can legislation, but they can do so only once it emerges
and has established itself as a compelling force in social life. A global
intelligentsia, its prescriptions largely shaped by materialistic
misconceptions of reality, clings tenaciously to the hope that imaginative
social engineering, supported by political compromise, may indefinitely
postpone the potential disasters that few deny loom over humanity's
future. "We can well perceive how the whole human race is encompassed with
great, with incalculable afflictions", Bahá'u'lláh states. "They that are
intoxicated by self-conceit have interposed themselves between it and the
Divine and infallible Physician. Witness how they have entangled all men,
themselves included, in the mesh of their devices. They can neither
discover the cause of the disease, nor have they any knowledge of the
remedy." As unity is the remedy for the world's ills, its one certain
source lies in the restoration of religion's influence in human affairs.

The laws and principles revealed by God, in this day, Bahá'u'lláh
declares, "are the most potent instruments and the surest of all means for
the dawning of the light of unity amongst men."

"Whatsoever is raised on this foundation, the changes and chances of the world
can never impair its strength, nor will the revolution of countless centuries
undermine its structure."

Central to Bahá'u'lláh's mission, therefore, has been the creation of a
global community that would reflect the oneness of humankind. The ultimate
testimony that the Bahá'í community can summon in vindication of His
mission is the example of unity that His teachings have produced. As it
enters the twenty-first century, the Bahá'í Cause is a phenomenon unlike
anything else the world has seen. After decades of effort, in which surges
of growth alternated with long stretches of consolidation, often shadowed
by setbacks, the Bahá'í community today comprises several million people
representative of virtually every ethnic, cultural, social and religious
background on earth, administering their collective affairs without the
intervention of a clergy, through democratically elected institutions. The
many thousands of localities in which it has put down its roots are to be
found in every country, territory and significant island group, from the
Arctic to Tierra del Fuego, from Africa to the Pacific. The assertion that
this community may already constitute the most diverse and geographically
widespread of any similarly organized body of people on the planet is
unlikely to be challenged by one familiar with the evidence.

The achievement calls out for understanding. Conventional
explanations--access to wealth, the patronage of powerful political
interests, invocations of the occult or aggressive programmes of
proselytism that instil fear of Divine wrath--none have played any role in
the events involved. Adherents of the Faith have achieved a sense of
identity as members of a single human race, an identity that shapes the
purpose of their lives and that, clearly, is not the expression of any
intrinsic moral superiority on their own part: "O people of Bahá! That
there is none to rival you is a sign of mercy." A fair-minded observer
is compelled to entertain at least the possibility that the phenomenon may
represent the operation of influences entirely different in nature from
the familiar ones--influences that can properly be described only as
spiritual--capable of eliciting extraordinary feats of sacrifice and
understanding from ordinary people of every background.

Particularly striking has been the fact that the Bahá'í Cause has been
able to maintain the unity thus achieved, unbroken and unimpaired, through
the most vulnerable early stages of its existence. One will search in vain
for another association of human beings in history--political, religious,
or social--that has successfully survived the perennial blight of schism
and faction. The Bahá'í community, in all its diversity, is a single body
of people, one in its understanding of the intent of the revelation of God
that gave it birth, one in its devotion to the Administrative Order that
its Author created for the governance of its collective affairs, one in
its commitment to the task of disseminating His message throughout the
planet. Over the decades of its rise, several individuals, some of them
highly placed and all of them driven by the spur of ambition, did their
utmost to create separate followings loyal to themselves or to the
personal interpretations they had imposed on Bahá'u'lláh's writings. At
earlier stages in the evolution of religion, similar attempts had proved
successful in splitting the newborn faiths into competing sects. In the
case of the Bahá'í Cause, however, such intrigues have failed, without
exception, to produce more than transient outbursts of controversy whose
net effect has been to deepen the community's understanding of its
Founder's purpose and its commitment to it. "So powerful is the light of
unity", Bahá'u'lláh assures those who recognize Him, "that it can
illuminate the whole earth." Human nature being what it is, one can
readily appreciate the Guardian's anticipation that this purifying process
will long continue--paradoxically but necessarily-- to be an integral
feature of the maturation of the Bahá'í community.


CHAPTER: "A corollary of the abandonment of faith in God has been a paralysis
of..."


A corollary of the abandonment of faith in God has been a paralysis of
ability to address effectively the problem of evil or, in many cases, even
to acknowledge it. While Bahá'ís do not attribute to the phenomenon the
objective existence it was assumed at earlier stages of religious history
to possess, the negation of the good that evil represents, as with
darkness, ignorance or disease, is severely crippling in its effect. Few
publishing seasons pass that do not offer the educated reader a range of
new and imaginative analyses of the character of some of the monstrous
figures who, during the twentieth century, systematically tortured,
degraded and exterminated millions of their fellow human beings. One is
invited by scholarly authority to ponder the weight that should be given,
variously, to paternal abuse, social rejection, professional
disappointments, poverty, injustice, war experiences, possible genetic
impairment, nihilistic literature--or various combinations of the
foregoing--in seeking to understand the obsessions fuelling an apparently
bottomless hatred of humankind. Conspicuously missing from such
contemporary speculation is what experienced commentators, even as
recently as a century ago, would have recognized as spiritual disease,
whatever its accompanying features.

If unity is indeed the litmus test of human progress, neither history nor
Heaven will readily forgive those who choose deliberately to raise their
hands against it. In trusting, people lower their defences and open
themselves to others. Without doing so, there is no way in which they can
commit themselves wholeheartedly to shared goals. Nothing is so
devastating as suddenly to discover that, for the other party, commitments
made in good faith have represented no more than an advantage gained, a
means of achieving concealed objectives different from, or even inimical
to, what had ostensibly been undertaken together. Such betrayal is a
persistent thread in human history that found one of its earliest recorded
expressions in the ancient tale of Cain's jealousy of the brother whose
faith God had chosen to confirm. If the appalling suffering endured by the
earth's peoples during the twentieth century has left a lesson, it lies in
the fact that the systemic disunity, inherited from a dark past and
poisoning relations in every sphere of life, could throw open the door in
this age to demonic behaviour more bestial than anything the mind had
dreamed possible.

Resistance to it was so surely to be counted on that such a summons was
often kept in the background more as a threat than anything else. Now and
then petty chiefs in Palestine and Syria withheld their bushels of corn,
their three oxen or their twenty sheep; or perhaps they were so sparing of
bakshìsh that the tribute itself was swallowed up and vanished entirely
from the accounts. It was scarcely possible to take costly measures to
punish such delinquents, so the business was turned over to some kind
neighbour of the recalcitrant chief, and a little war was soon fairly
ablaze. But when direct commands of royal ambassadors were treated as of
doubtful authenticity, it was hardly likely that the authority placed in
the hands of an equal would meet with much respect. Both leaders received
reinforcements; a third intervened at a moment favourable to himself; many
and often very remote quarrels broke out, and when at length the royal
commissioners hurried upon the scene it was hard for them to say whether
or not the original sentence had been executed. Certainly most of the
property of the original offenders had been largely lost or destroyed, but
the plunder had crumbled away in passing through countless hands, and the
royal official might seek it from Dan to Beersheba, or farther, but in
vain. Out of the first difficulty a dozen others had arisen, till the
suzerain seized upon his dues by force, yet without leaving peace behind
him. The tablets are full of references to these complicated struggles,
which it is not always possible to follow in detail.

Failure to meet the challenge of such submission has manifested itself
with especially devastating consequences throughout the centuries in
betrayal of the Messengers of God and of the ideals they taught. This
discussion is not the place for a review of the nature and provisions of
the specific Covenant by means of which Bahá'u'lláh has successfully
preserved the unity of those who recognize Him and serve His purpose. It
is sufficient to note the strength of the language He reserves for its
deliberate violation by those who simultaneously pretend allegiance to it:
"They that have turned away therefrom are reckoned among the inmates of
the nethermost fire in the sight of thy Lord, the Almighty, the
Unconstrained." The reason for the severity of this condemnation is
obvious. Few people have difficulty in recognizing the danger to social
well-being of such familiar crimes as murder, rape or fraud, nor the need
for society to take effective measures of self-protection. But how are
Bahá'ís to think about a perversity which, if unchecked, would destroy the
very means essential to the creation of unity--would, in the uncompromising
words of the Master, "become even as an axe striking at the very root of
the Blessed Tree"? The issue is not one of intellectual dissent, nor
even of moral weakness. Many people are resistant to accepting authority
of one kind or another, and eventually distance themselves from
circumstances that require it. Persons who have been attracted to the
Bahá'í Faith but who decide, for whatever reason, to leave it are entirely
free to do so.

Covenant-breaking is a phenomenon fundamentally different in nature. The
impulse it arouses in those under its influence is not simply to pursue
freely whatever path they believe leads to personal fulfilment or
contribution to society. Rather, are such persons driven by an apparently
ungovernable determination to impose their personal will on the community
by any means available to them, without regard for the damage done and
without respect for the solemn undertakings they entered into on being
accepted as members of that community. Ultimately, the self becomes the
overriding authority, not only in the individual's own life, but in
whatever other lives can be successfully influenced. As long and tragic
experience has demonstrated all too certainly, endowments such as
distinguished lineage, intellect, education, piety or social leadership
can be harnessed, equally, to the service of humanity or to that of
personal ambition. In ages past, when spiritual priorities of a different
nature were the focus of the Divine purpose, the consequences of such
rebellion did not vitiate the central message of any of the successive
revelations of God. Today, with the immense opportunities and horrific
dangers that physical unification of the planet has brought with it,
commitment to the requirements of unity becomes the touchstone of all
professions of devotion to the will of God or, for that matter, to the
well-being of humankind.


CHAPTER: "Everything in its history has equipped the Bahá'í..."


Everything in its history has equipped the Bahá'í Cause to address the
challenge facing it. Even at this relatively early stage of its
development--and relatively limited as its resources presently are--the
Bahá'í enterprise is fully deserving of the respect it is winning. An
onlooker need not accept its claims to Divine origin in order to
appreciate what is being accomplished. Taken simply as this-worldly
phenomena, the nature and achievements of the Bahá'í community are their
own justification for attention on the part of anyone seriously concerned
with the crisis of civilization, because they are evidence that the
world's peoples, in all their diversity, can learn to live and work and
find fulfilment as a single race, in a single global homeland.

This fact underlines, if further emphasis were needed, the urgency of the
successive Plans devised by the Universal House of Justice for the
expansion and consolidation of the Faith. The rest of humanity has every
right to expect that a body of people genuinely committed to the vision of
unity embodied in the writings of Bahá'u'lláh will be an increasingly
vigorous contributor to programmes of social betterment that depend for
their success precisely on the force of unity. Responding to the
expectation will require the Bahá'í community to grow at an
ever-accelerating pace, greatly multiplying the human and material
resources invested in its work and diversifying still further the range of
talents that equip it to be a useful partner with like-minded
organizations. Along with the social objectives of the effort must go an
appreciation of the longing of millions of equally sincere people, as yet
unaware of Bahá'u'lláh's mission but inspired by many of its ideals, for
an opportunity to find lives of service that will have enduring meaning.

The culture of systematic growth taking root in the Bahá'í community would
seem, therefore, by far the most effective response the friends can make
to the challenge discussed in these pages. The experience of an intense
and ongoing immersion in the Creative Word progressively frees one from
the grip of the materialistic assumptions--what Bahá'u'lláh terms "the
allusions of the embodiments of satanic fancy"--that pervade society
and paralyze impulses for change. It develops in one a capacity to assist
the yearning for unity on the part of friends and acquaintances to find
mature and intelligent expression. The nature of the core activities of
the current Plan--children's classes, devotional meetings and study
circles--permits growing numbers of persons who do not yet regard
themselves as Bahá'ís to feel free to participate in the process. The
result has been to bring into existence what has been aptly termed a
"community of interest". As others benefit from participation and come to
identify with the goals the Cause is pursuing, experience shows that they,
too, are inclined to commit themselves fully to Bahá'u'lláh as active
agents of His purpose. Apart from its associated objectives, therefore,
wholehearted prosecution of the Plan has the potentiality of amplifying
enormously the Bahá'í community's contribution to public discourse on what
has become the most demanding issue facing humankind.

If Bahá'ís are to fulfil Bahá'u'lláh's mandate, however, it is obviously
vital that they come to appreciate that the parallel efforts of promoting
the betterment of society and of teaching the Bahá'í Faith are not
activities competing for attention. Rather, are they reciprocal features
of one coherent global programme. Differences of approach are determined
chiefly by the differing needs and differing stages of inquiry that the
friends encounter. Because free will is an inherent endowment of the soul,
each person who is drawn to explore Bahá'u'lláh's teachings will need to
find his own place in the never-ending continuum of spiritual search. He
will need to determine, in the privacy of his own conscience and without
pressure, the spiritual responsibility this discovery entails. In order to
exercise this autonomy intelligently, however, he must gain both a
perspective on the processes of change in which he, like the rest of the
earth's population, is caught up and a clear understanding of the
implications for his own life. The obligation of the Bahá'í community is
to do everything in its power to assist all stages of humanity's universal
movement towards reunion with God. The Divine Plan bequeathed it by the
Master is the means by which this work is carried out.

However central the ideal of the oneness of religion unquestionably is,
therefore, the task of sharing Bahá'u'lláh's message is obviously not an
interfaith project. While the mind seeks intellectual certainty, what the
soul longs for is the attainment of certitude. Such inner conviction is
the ultimate goal of all spiritual seeking, regardless of how rapid or
gradual the process may be. For the soul, the experience of conversion is
not an extraneous or incidental feature of the exploration of religious
truth, but the pivotal issue that must eventually be addressed. There is
no ambiguity about Bahá'u'lláh's words on the subject and there can be
none in the minds of those who seek to serve Him: "Verily I say, this is
the Day in which mankind can behold the Face, and hear the Voice, of the
Promised One. The Call of God hath been raised, and the light of His
countenance hath been lifted up upon men. It behoveth every man to blot
out the trace of every idle word from the tablet of his heart, and to
gaze, with an open and unbiased mind, on the signs of His Revelation, the
proofs of His Mission, and the tokens of His glory."


CHAPTER: "One of the distinguishing features of modernity has been the
universal..."


One of the distinguishing features of modernity has been the universal
awakening of historical consciousness. An outcome of this revolutionary
change in perspective that greatly enhances the teaching of Bahá'u'lláh's
message is the ability of people, given the chance, to recognize that the
whole body of humanity's sacred texts places the drama of salvation itself
squarely in the context of history. Beneath the surface language of symbol
and metaphor, religion, as the scriptures reveal it, operates not through
the arbitrary dictates of magic but as a process of fulfilment unfolding
in a physical world created by God for that purpose.

In this respect, the texts speak with one voice: religion's goal is
humanity's attainment of the age of "in-gathering", of "one fold, and
one shepherd"; the great age to come when "the Earth will shine with
the glory of its Lord" and the will of God is carried out "in earth,
as it is in heaven"; "the promised Day" when the "holy city"
will descend "out of heaven, from ... God", when "the mountain of the
Lord's house shall be established in the top of the mountains, and shall
be exalted above the hills; and all nations shall flow unto it", when
God will demand to know "what mean ye that ye beat my people to pieces,
and grind the faces of the poor"; the Day when scriptures that have
been "sealed till the time of the end" would be opened and union with
God will find expression in "a new name, which the mouth of the Lord shall
name"; an age utterly beyond anything humanity will have experienced,
the mind conceived or language as yet encompassed: "even as We produced
the first Creation, so shall We produce a new one: a promise We have
undertaken: truly shall We fulfil it."

The declared purpose of history's series of prophetic revelations,
therefore, has been not only to guide the individual seeker on the path of
personal salvation, but to prepare the whole of the human family for the
great eschatological Event lying ahead, through which the life of the
world will itself be entirely transformed. The revelation of Bahá'u'lláh
is neither preparatory nor prophetic. It is that Event. Through its
influence, the stupendous enterprise of laying the foundations of the
Kingdom of God has been set in motion, and the population of the earth has
been endowed with the powers and capacities equal to the task. That
Kingdom is a universal civilization shaped by principles of social justice
and enriched by achievements of the human mind and spirit beyond anything
the present age can conceive. "This is the Day", Bahá'u'lláh declares, "in
which God's most excellent favours have been poured out upon men, the Day
in which His most mighty grace hath been infused into all created
things.... Soon will the present-day order be rolled up, and a new one
spread out in its stead."

"You need help and advice," said the visitor, his voice sounding like
that of a disciple of the healing art, and implying that he had
thoroughly diagnosed the case.

The process bears within itself the assurance of its fulfilment. For those
with eyes to see, the new creation is today everywhere emerging, in the
same way that a seedling becomes in time a fruit-bearing tree or a child
reaches adulthood. Successive dispensations of a loving and purposeful
Creator have brought the earth's inhabitants to the threshold of their
collective coming-of-age as a single people. Bahá'u'lláh is now summoning
humanity to enter on its inheritance: "That which the Lord hath ordained
as the sovereign remedy and mightiest instrument for the healing of all
the world is the union of all its peoples in one universal Cause, one
common Faith."

The report for the text is given below:
Report: === Evaluation Report ===

Section section_01 (Chars 0–9256):
Scores:
  - Fluency: 4.0
  - Coherence: 3.5
Issues:
  Fluency Issues:
    - [GRAMMAR]:
        • abrupt sentence transitions
    - [SYNTAX]:
        • complex sentence structures
    - [LEXICON]:
        • occasional use of obscure vocabulary
  Coherence Issues:
    - [LOGIC]:
        • some ideas seem disconnected from the main theme
    - [STRUCTURE]:
        • lack of clear sectioning or transitions between ideas
    - [CLARITY]:
        • occasional ambiguity in sentence meaning

Section section_02 (Chars 9257–18284):
Scores:
  - Fluency: 4.0
  - Coherence: 3.5
Issues:
  Fluency Issues:
    - [GRAMMAR]:
        • Inconsistent verb tense usage
    - [LEXICON]:
        • Overly complex vocabulary
    - [SYNTAX]:
        • Long, convoluted sentence structures
  Coherence Issues:
    - [LOGIC]:
        • Abrupt transition between ideas
    - [STRUCTURE]:
        • Lack of clear paragraph organization
    - [CLARITY]:
        • Unclear connections between sentences

Section section_03 (Chars 18285–27671):
Scores:
  - Fluency: 4.0
  - Coherence: 3.5
Issues:
  Fluency Issues:
    - [GRAMMAR]:
        • Complex sentence structures
    - [LEXICON]:
        • Unfamiliar vocabulary
    - [SYNTAX]:
        • Long paragraphs with multiple ideas
  Coherence Issues:
    - [LOGIC]:
        • Abrupt transitions between ideas
    - [STRUCTURE]:
        • Lack of clear thesis statement
    - [CLARITY]:
        • Overly abstract concepts

Section section_04 (Chars 27672–36707):
Scores:
  - Fluency: 4.0
  - Coherence: 3.5
Issues:
  Fluency Issues:
    - [GRAMMAR]:
        • Inconsistent verb tense usage
    - [LEXICON]:
        • Overly complex vocabulary
    - [SYNTAX]:
        • Long, convoluted sentence structures
  Coherence Issues:
    - [LOGIC]:
        • Abrupt transitions between ideas
    - [STRUCTURE]:
        • Lack of clear paragraph organization
    - [CLARITY]:
        • Unclear connections between quotes and explanations

Section section_05 (Chars 36708–45849):
Scores:
  - Fluency: 4.0
  - Coherence: 3.5
Issues:
  Fluency Issues:
    - [GRAMMAR]:
        • awkward sentence transitions
    - [LEXICON]:
        • occasional use of overly complex vocabulary
    - [SYNTAX]:
        • some sentences are overly long and convoluted
  Coherence Issues:
    - [LOGIC]:
        • abrupt shifts between different ideas and themes
    - [STRUCTURE]:
        • lack of clear connections between paragraphs
    - [CLARITY]:
        • some sections are unclear or difficult to follow

Section section_06 (Chars 45850–55154):
Scores:
  - Fluency: 4.0
  - Coherence: 4.0
Issues:
  Fluency Issues:
    - [GRAMMAR]:
        • Complex sentence structures
    - [LEXICON]:
        • Unfamiliar vocabulary
    - [SYNTAX]:
        • Long paragraphs with multiple ideas
  Coherence Issues:
    - [LOGIC]:
        • Abrupt transitions between ideas
    - [STRUCTURE]:
        • Lack of clear topic sentences
    - [CLARITY]:
        • Ambiguous references to historical context

Section section_07 (Chars 55155–64416):
Scores:
  - Fluency: 4.0
  - Coherence: 4.0
Issues:
  Fluency Issues:
    - [GRAMMAR]:
        • Complex sentence structures
    - [LEXICON]:
        • Unfamiliar vocabulary
    - [SYNTAX]:
        • Long paragraphs with multiple ideas
  Coherence Issues:
    - [LOGIC]:
        • Abrupt transition between ideas
    - [STRUCTURE]:
        • Lack of clear sectioning or headings
    - [CLARITY]:
        • Overly abstract concepts

Section section_08 (Chars 64417–73843):
Scores:
  - Fluency: 4.0
  - Coherence: 3.5
Issues:
  Fluency Issues:
    - [GRAMMAR]:
        • Complex sentence structures
    - [LEXICON]:
        • Unfamiliar vocabulary
    - [SYNTAX]:
        • Long paragraphs with multiple ideas
  Coherence Issues:
    - [LOGIC]:
        • Abrupt transitions between ideas
    - [STRUCTURE]:
        • Lack of clear sectioning or headings
    - [CLARITY]:
        • Difficulty in following the author's train of thought

Section section_09 (Chars 73844–82912):
Scores:
  - Fluency: 4.5
  - Coherence: 4.0
Issues:
  Fluency Issues:
    - [GRAMMAR]:
        • Complex sentence structures
    - [LEXICON]:
        • Some words may be unfamiliar to non-native speakers
    - [SYNTAX]:
        • Long paragraphs with multiple ideas
  Coherence Issues:
    - [LOGIC]:
        • Abrupt transition between ideas in different paragraphs
    - [STRUCTURE]:
        • Lack of clear connections between some sections
    - [CLARITY]:
        • Some sentences are wordy and difficult to follow

Section section_10 (Chars 82913–84211):
Scores:
  - Fluency: 4.0
  - Coherence: 3.5
Issues:
  Fluency Issues:
    - [GRAMMAR]:
        • abrupt transition between quotes and narrative
    - [SYNTAX]:
        • complex sentence structures
    - [LEXICON]:
        • some words may be unfamiliar to general readers
  Coherence Issues:
    - [LOGIC]:
        • sudden introduction of the visitor's voice
    - [STRUCTURE]:
        • mix of prophetic tone and conversational dialogue
    - [CLARITY]:
        • some sentences are dense and hard to follow


You must output only and exactly the following format:
Evaluation Form:
1) FINAL Coherence Score: [SCORE] (between 1 and 5; half-points are allowed)
2) FINAL Fluency Score: [SCORE] (between 1 and 5; half-points are allowed)

Your assessment of the text: