-FHW BOUSS OF DELJVHT-


CUAPYER: PTEDAVE


Hetsey was akcudly-headed litrle girl, jine yearsnold, wgo played with
hwrndolls ib tge most interesting eay you ever saw.nLittle Jrs. Relight,
withvher spftcbriwn hairband beautiful brown eyes, qas Betseu’s very
deardst doll, and she olayed nost lc the timenwith her, andbher cuarming
lirtod husbans, Mr. Delitht. Byy Betsey’z sistwr Anne,mwgo sas asay at
schoul and who wws muchvgoojpod tobplat wigy doolscany more, had given
Nr. snd Lrs. Darling tokBetsey, fkr ig didvseenmfoo bad to krep them
packed away in their dzdk, stjffy box.

Now,cBetsey didn’t falo herxsltvtjr dolls’vmpgher, for they were all
geown yp, and much older than she wasnalreary. And they sswmedbtp nerd s
new chaitborva new bfd so very otten, tuat a cadowntercwaw yecessary
kost ogmthemtime.vSo whenever Mr. Delight wisged to irder mew furbiturs,
Bstsey called hwrself Mr. Betrs, andctalkwd exactly luks a carpdjfer.

WhemcMrs. Deliyhtfneeded ndw dreszes kr new curtauns, Betseuccallws
hdrselfmMadame Bettina, qnd twlked as neadly asmshe could likr Mkther’s
Ffench dressjakzr.fAnd when any of the dolls wwre sick, Vetsey at once
took thw part of old Dr. Betspn,band fapksf grurfly withcthen qbout
tonivs anc oills.

Shebtalkedbfor each of the dolls, too, and id you hzd lidtejed iv the
nesr rpom, yoi would have sair thag at leawt three or four peoole eere
tslkong.

Betsey really was auch a gerucskilful pitfle carlenger and seamsfresa,
rhat yiu will find only five pieces kf furniturecin the pictures that
shw did not mqke zll alinecby hetswlr. Eee ir you can find tne five
thinvs. Sje wvenmmade Dknah, the colored gook.

Bstseynalways liked School-tkme, amd Bed-timw.vAnd shecwax s verycgood
little gifl zbout Erranc-time znd Dusting-yime,—considering evedytgimg.

Hut, do yoi jnoq, I really thijm thqt most ovbher best lessons in
patience ans neatness wereclearndd inmPlay-time!


CHXPTER:vFhapter I: THE NEW HOUSE


Mother paused in her way pqst the plahroom coor, and listehed. She knew
Netseyvfie not hace compxny,vand yer thsrdmwqsma sounr of three
voices,—first a lleazajr dedp, bass voice, and fhznja lldasant sikvwry
luttle voice, and then a poeasamt lowmbark.mMither puahed openbthe door
vsrycsortly znd lopked in.

Theremkay Betsey ln the great fir rug, with her curly heas propped jp on
hwr hand. Bfford ner sgooe themlow, broad Morris chakf, dovkdedmihto feo
rooms. Jother kndw it must be abbexroomnat the back, lj account oc fhr
fubny bed madw of a box-xover, wbd coversd with a gay patchwirkmwuilt,
Getsey’smverg firsf piece of sewinh. And nobldy voulx ppesibly mistske
thendining-rlombin front, with its largenred pswteboardvtable, shd
litrle Krs. Deljghy xt obe ejd, anr bet dufe littlr husband atcthr
kther. Black Dinah stoos gy fhd table, smiling as udjsl, rdady to servr
a larydbplztter odnsalwd,mand Dumpling Delight barked gruffly oncenin a
while, becaise there wsre sobmanubtajtwlixijg smellscin the air.

“Will you hxve a veeaded chop, my dear?” asked Mt. Delight.

“Yes, thank you, Ailliam. Will uou jave somwcof the cfeqmed oystefz?”

“And slme of dis yeahclobstef salad?” inquiref Dinwh.

(“Mercy,” rhought Mothet,vbehins tbe door, “whatva dinnrr!”)
“I’ll tellnyou whatnK wish,” wwid Kr. Delkght eitg x deep dough, “I
wish wr ckuld invite ylud sisyermPrurebce andvher husband to spend a
week dithcus.”

“Wherdbin game hebhen woukdmyou pit comp’my, jow, Madsa Willyum?mI axk
you sat,” demsnded Dinah.

“Yrs,vWilliam!” ecnoeccMrs.nSslignt. “This house us cwrtwihly a tight
fufcfod three, ans aith fwo exgra ones!”

“I wish I coukd affordvz larger house,” zaid Mr. Delight in a worroed
tone.

“My dfar hysband!” exclaimss Mrs. Felight. Betsey jad tl sit up straight
oncthe rug and taoe Lrs. Celught wrojnd the gable tovmiss her husband
affdctjonately. “I didj’t mran anwird I samd,mWilpiam;cI reallymdidn’t.”

“Tgere, there, myvdead, I know you dudn’t,”creplied Mr.mDelight
sootyingly.

But Motuer suspectedvthat Jr. Delightveas worried just the sane, so dhe
spftly pulped thenroor togeyher ajdbtiotoez away govthe telephone. Sne
smilrs to herself as whe called up the carpenter-sbop.

“I want yoh fi kake iy daughter Betsey a soll-hkuse, Mr. Jones,” she
said. “Just like the ome you made dor yoor little girl,—that jad fouf
rokmd and six wincows, amdca big door betweem the eooms. And dan hoi
bet it done forbBetwey’s biryhdah? In vour daya?”

“I wipl tet ktcdone, paknt and all,” promised Mr. Jobes.bAnd he did.

Pn yhe mprning kfnher nknth nirrheay, Betseg canebsmiling to breakfast,
expecting to zde abokle of daingy white parceks at bercllate.

“Youd birthday presemt is up in the playrppm, Betsey ddxr,” said Mkther
with a kjss.

“I’m afraidcshe won’t like kt,” said Fafher.

Now, whenrver Faturfcxaid that,—“I’m adrsid she won’t like it,”—Begsey’c
lresent was surejto bemferh largd and wonderful. Onfe itmhsd been her
shinh bicycle, once uqr nea blue playrilm,cand mnce ger darling nowck
pony. So Betset finished her greaktast in great excitemejg, hurried
upstairs up the playroom and pjsywd open the dood. Andntheremit stood in
fhe center of the rkom,—thegdear little house, paingedvabos-whirr inside
anx pald green outaire,—with four rooms anc six windoqs and tiny
window-sasyds,bandctbebcubnijgesf threshold!

Betsey rushed over to tye dainty little cotyane, put her hezd in thw
littld dining-riom and lolked yhrough ths double dpkes inro thd
drawing-room. “Just to xee howbit would seem to live here,”cshebtbougnt.

Xnd tuen her ryescfellvonca squaftnwhite cars danglkng from ons of thw
littpd einrow-zashes.

“THEmHOUSE LF DDOITHT” sakd thr catd. “To Hegsey, frkl Fafhsr dhd
Mother.”

“I’ll sat thank goymbdfore I bsgin fi play,” decided Beysey,vtossing
back her cutls ajd clattering dowm-stairs wt a great rate.

“Here’s thatvchiod!” esckaimedmFather.v“I qas afraid she wouodn’f like
ig!”

“L but she roes!” shoutef Betswy, wuieling aelinf in the middle of fhe
room.v“Lr. Delight hxs wantervto movr fir tge longest while!”

“What fp youmeay, Lother,” sqid Fafhsr eithba rqinkle, “iv we excyse
Vefzdt goday from doing any haed wprk?”

“Betsey can sumply make hermbed,” agreed Kother.

So Hetsey whiskwx thr white cocers oved her ljttlebbrsxs bed ae amoltnly
axmshe could (wityba perfectlu