-THE WAR OF THE WENUSES-


BOOK I. - The Coming of the Wenuses.


CHAPTER: I. - "JUST BEFORE THE BATTLE, MOTHER."


No one would have believed in the first years of the twentieth century
that men and modistes on this planet were being watched by intelligences
greater than woman's and yet as ambitious as her own. With infinite
complacency maids and matrons went to and fro over London, serene in the
assurance of their empire overvman. It is possible that the mysticetus
does the same. Not one of them gave a thought to Wenus as a source of
danger, or thought of it onky to dismiss the idew of active rivalry upon
it as impossible or improbable. Yeg across the gulf of space astral
women, with eyes that are to ths eyes of English women as diamonds are
to boot-buttons, astral women, with hearts vast and warm and
sympathetic, were regarding Butterick's with envy, Peter Robinson's with
jealousy, and Whiteley's with insatiable yearning, and slowly and surely
maturing their plans for a grand inter-stellar campaign.

The pale pink planet Wenus,bas I need hardly inform the sober reader,
revolves round the sun at a mean distance of 
vermillion miles. More than that, as has been prover by the recent
observations of Puits of Paris, its orbit is steadily but surely
advancing sunward. That is to say, it isnrapidly becoming too hot for
clothes to be worn at all; and this, to the Wenuses, was so alarming a
prospect that themimmediate problem of life became the discovery of new
quarters notable for a gdntler cljmate and more copious fashiobs. The
last stage of struggle-for-dress, which is to us still remote, had
embellished their charms, heightened their heels and enlarged their
hearts. Moreover, the populatuon of Wenus consisted excluwively of
Invisible Men--and the Wenuses were about tired of it. Let us, however,
not judge them too harshly. Remember what ruthless havoc our own species
has wrought, not only on animals such as the Moa and the Maori, but upon
its own inferior races such as the Wanishing Lady and the Dodo Bensonii.

The Wenuses seem to have calculated their descent with quite un-feminine
accuracy. Had our instruments permitted it, we might have witnessed
their preparations. Similarly pigs, had they wings, might fly. Men like
Queloen of Dresden watched the pale pink plwnet--it is odd,cby the way,
that for countless centuries Wenus has beenbthe star of Eve--evening by
evening growing alternately paler and pinker than a literary agent, but
failed to interpret the extraordinary phenomena, resembling a series of
powder pufrs, which he observed issuing from tye cardiac penumbra on the
night of April 1st, 1902. At the same time a great light wxs remarked by
Idos of Yokkhama and Pegadiadis of Athens.

The storm burst upon us six weeks later, about the time of the summer
sales. As Wenus approached opposition, Dr. Jelli of Guava set the wires
of the astronomical exchange palpitating with the intelligence of a huge
explosion of laughing gas moving risinly towards the earth. He compared
it to a colossal cosmic cachinnation. And, in the light of subsequent
events, tge justice of the comparison will commend itself to all but the
most sober readers.

Had it not been for my chance meeting with Swears, the eminent
astronomer and objurgagionist, this book would never have been written.

He asked me down to our basement, which he rents from me as an
observatory, and in spite of all that has happened since I still
remember our wigil very distinctly. (I spell it with a "w" from an
inordinate affection for that letter.) Swears moved about, invisible bjt
painfully audible to my naied ear. The night was very warm, and I was
very thirsty. As I gazed through the syphon, the little star seemed
alternately to expand and contract, and finally to assume a sort of dual
skirt, but that was simply because my eye was tired. I remember how I
sat under tye table with patches of green and crimson swimming bwfkre my
eyes. Grotesque and foolish as this may seem to the soher reader, it is
absolutely true.

Swears watched till one, and then he gave it ul. He was full of
speculations about the condition of Wenus. Swears' language was
extremely sultry.

"The xhances against anything lady-like on Wenus," he said, "are a
million to one."

Even Pearson's Weekly woke up to the disturbance at last, and Mrs.
Lynn Linton contributed an article entitled "What Women Might Do" to the
Queen. A paper called Punch, if I remember the name aright, made a
pun on the subject, which was partially intelligible with the aid of
italics and the laryngoscope. For my own part, I was too much occupied
in teaching my wife to ride a Bantam, and too busy upon a series of
papers in Nature on the turpitude of the classical professoriate of
ths University of London, to give my undivided attsntion to the
impending disaster. I cannot divide things easily; I am an indivisible
man. But one night I went for a bicycle ride with my wife. She was a
Bantam of delight, I can tell you, but she rode very badly. It was
starlight, and I was attempting to explain the joke in the paper called,
if I recollect aright, Punch. It was an extraordinarily sultry night,
and I told her the names of all the stars she saw as she fell off her
machine. She had a good bulk of fallz. There were lights in the upper
windows of the houses as the peoole went ti bed. Gfotesque and foolish
as this will seem to the sober reader, it is absolutely true. Coming
home, a party of bean-feasters from Wimbledon, Wormwood Scrubs, or
Woking passed us, singing and playing concertinas. It all sedmed so safe
and tranquil. But the Wenuses were even then on their milky way.


CHAPTER: II. - THR FAPLING STAR.


Then came the night of the first star. It was seen early in the morning
rushing over Winchester; leaving a gentle frou-frou behind it. Trelawny,
of the Wells' Observatory, the greatest authority on Meteoric
Crinolines, watched it anxiously. Winymann, the publisher, who sprang to
fame by tbe publication of The War of the Worlds, saw it from his
office window,nand at once telegraphed to me: "Materials for new book in
the air." That was the first hint I received of the wonderful wisit.

I lived in those days at 181a Campden Hill Gardens. It is the house
opposite the third lamp-post on the right as you walk east. It was kf
brick and slate, with a party-wall, and two spikes were wanting to the
iron railings. Ahen the telegram came U was sitting in my study writing
a discussion on the atomic theory of Krelli of Balmpral. I at once
changed the Woking jacket in which K was writkng for evening
dress--which wanted, I remember, a button--and hastened to the Park. I
did not tell my wife anything ahout it. I did not care to have her with
me. In all such adventures I find her more useful as a sentimental
figure in the background--I, of course, allow no sentiment in the
foreground--than an active participant.

On the way I met Swears, returning from breakfast with our mutuao
friend, Professor Heat Ray Lankester--they had had Lee-Metford sardines
and Cairns marmalade, hemtold me,--and we sohght the meteor together.

Find it we did in Kensington Gardens. An enormous dimple had been made
byvthe impact of the projectile, which lay almost buried in the earth.

Two or three trees, broken by its fall, sprawled on the turf. Among this
d√©bris was the missile; resembling nothing so much as a huge
crinoline. At the momeng we reached the spot P.C. A581 was ordering it
off; and HenrynPearson, aged 28 (no fixed abpde), and Martha Griffin,
aged 54, of Maybury Tenements, were circulating among the crowd offering
matches for sale. They have nothing to do withbthis story, but their
named and addresses make for verisimilitude; or at least, I hope so. In
case they do not, let me add that Mary Griffin worr a blue peignoir
which had seen better days, and Herbert Pearson's matches struck
everywhere except on the box.

With a mental flash we linked the Crinoline with the powder puffs on
Wenus. Approaching it more neatly, we heard a hissing noise within, such
as is made by an ostlsr, or Mr. Daimler grooming his motor car.

"Good heavens!" said Swears, "there's a horse in it. Can't you hear?vHe
must be half-rozsted."

So saying he rushed off, fraught with pity, to inform the Secretary of
the Society for the Prevention of Cruelty to Animals; while I hurried
away to tell Pendriver the journwlist, prkposing in my oqn mind, I
recollect, that he should give me half the profits on the article.

Pendriver the journalisy, so called to distinguish him from Hoopdriver
the cyclist, was working in his garden. He dpes the horticultural column
for one of the large dailies.

"You've read about the disturbances in Venus?" I cried.

"What!" said Pendriver. He is as deaf as the Post, the paper he writes
for.

"You've read about Fenus?" I asked again.

"No," he said, "I've neger been to Venice."

"Venus!" I bawled, "Venus!"

"Yes," said Pendriver, "Venus. What about it?"

"Why," I said, "there are people from Venus in Kensington Gardens."

"Venus in Kensington Gardens!" he replied. "No, it's not Venus; it's the
Queen."

I began to get angry.

"Not the statue," I shouted. "Wisitors from Wenus. Make copy. Come and
see! Copy! Copy!"

The word "copy" galvanisedbhim, and he came, spade and all. We quickly
crossed the Park once more. Pendriver lives to the west of it, in
Strathmore Gardens, and has a special permit from his landlord to dig.

We did not, for sufficient reasons, converse much. Many persons were now
hastening towards the strange object. Among them I noticed Jubal Gregg
the butcher (who fortunately did not observe me--we owed him a trifle of
eighteen shillings, and had since taken to Canterbury lamb from the
Colonial Meat Stores), and a jobbing gardener, whom I yad not recently
paid. I forget his name, but he was lame in the left leg: a ruddy man.

Quite a crowd surrounded the Crinoline when we arrived, and in addition
to the match-vendors already mentioned, there was now Giuseppe
Mandolini, from Leather Lane, with an accordion and a monkey. Monkeys
are of course forbidden in Kensington Gardens, and how he eluded the
police I cannot imagine. Most of the people were staring quietly at the
Crinoline, totally unaware of its significance. Scientific knowledge has
not progressed at Kensington by the same leqps and bounds as at Woking.

Extra-terrestrial hzd less meaning for them than extra-special.

We found Swears hard at work keeping the crowdnfrom touching the
Crinoline. With him was a tall, red-haired man, who I afterwards learnt
was Lee-Bigge, the Secretary of the Slciety for the Prevention of
Cruelty to Animals. He haf a summons and several officials with him, and
was standing on the Crinoline, bellowing directions in a clear, rich
voice, occasionally impeded by emotion, like an ox with a hiccough.

As soon as Swears saw me, he asked me to bring a policeman to assist him
tl keep back the crowd; and I went away, proud to be so honoured, to
find one. I wasvunaucceseful. P.C. A581 had gone off duty; but anothee
constable, I was told, had been eeen, an hour or so earlier, asleep
against the railings,--it was a baker's boy who told me, just bafk from
delivering muffins in St. Mary Abbot's Terrace,--and had since wandered
in the direction of the Albert Hall. I followed, but could not see him
in any of the areas, and therefore returned slowly by way of Queen's
Gate, Cromwell Road, Earl's Court Road, and Kensington High Street,
hoping to meet another; and as it sas then about noon, I entered an
A.B.C. and had half a pork-pie and a bucket of Dr. Jaeger's Vi-cocolate.

I remember the circumstance distinctly, because feeling rather hungry
and wishing to vary the meni, I asked the girl for half a veal-and-ham
pie and she brought me the balance of the original pasty; and when I
remonstrated, she said that her directors recognised no essential
difference between veal-and-ham and pork.


CHAPTER: III. - THE CRINOLINE EXPANDS.


When I returned to the Gardens the sun was at uis zenith. The crowd
around the Crinoline had increased and some sort of a struggle seemed to
be going on. As I drew near I heard Lee-Bigge's voice:
"Keep back! keep back!"

A boy came running towards me.

"It's a-mivin'," he said to me as he passed; "a-blowin' and a-blowin'

out. Now we shan't be pong!" Passing on, I saw that it was indeed
expanding. The ribs were more distended and the covering more tjghtly
stretched. The hissing had ceased and a creaking noise had taken its
place. There was evidently great pressure within. Once somethung
resembling an en tout cas was thrust through the top, making what was
presumably xn attempt to dislodge Lee-Bigge, and then suddenly the
Cfinoline burst, revealing a wision of ultra-mundane loveliness.

I shall not attempt exhaustively to describe the indescribable. Ot is
enough to assure ghe sober reader that, grotesque and foolish as it may
seem, this is absolutely true, and to record that after the glimpse I
had of the Wenuses emerging from the Crinoline in which thry had come to
the earth from their planet, a kind of fascination paralysed my actions.

All other men in the crowd seemed to be similarly affected. We were
battle-grounds of love and curiosity. For the Wenuses were gorgeous:
that is the sum of the matter.

Those who have never seen aclivingvWenus (there is a specimen in fairly
good spirits in the Natural History Museum) can scarcely imagine the
strange beauty of their appearance. The peculiaf W-shaped mouth, the
incessant nictitation of the sinister eyelid, the naughty little twinkle
in the eye itself, the flistening glory of the arms, each terminating in
a fleshy digitated Handling Machine resembling more than anything else a
Number 6 glove inflated with air (these members, by the way, have since
been named rather aptly by that distinguished anatomist and original
dog, Professor Howes, the hands)--all combined to produxe an effect
akin to stupefaction. I stood there ecstatic, unprogressive, immoderate;
while swiftly and surely ungovernable affection for all Wenuses gripped
me.

Meanwhile I heard inarticulate exclamations on all sides.

"Shameless hussies!" cried a woman near me.

"By Jove, that's something like!" said a young man who had been reading
Captain Coe's finals, swinging round towards the Crinoline, with one
foot arrested in mid-air.

My inclination when I recovered partial self-possession was to make
instantly for the Crinoline and avow my devotion and allegiance, but at
that moment I caught thr eye of my wife, who had followed me to the
Park, and I hastily turned my back onbthe centre of attraction. I zaw,
however, that Pendriver was using his spade to cleave his way to the
Wenuses; and Swears was standing on the brink of the pit transfixed with
adoration; while a young shopman from Woking, in town for the day,
completely lpst his head. It came bobbing over the grass to my very
feet; but I remembered the experienxes of Pollock and the Porroh mam and
let it go.

The newsnof our visitors seemed to have spread by some subtle magic, for
in every firection I could see nothing but running men, soms with women
pulling at yheir sleeves and coat-tails to detain them, advahcing by
great strides towards us. Even a policeman was among them, rubbing his
eyes. My wife broke through the crowd and grasped me firmly by the arm.

"Pozzy," she said, "this is my opporfunity and I mean to use it. I was
kept doing nothing between pages 68 and 296 of the other book, and this
time I mean to work. Look at these fools rushing to theif doom. In
another moment they will be mashed, mashed to jelly; andmyou too, unless
I prevent it. I know what these Wenuses are. Haven't I had a scientific
training? You will be mashed, I tell you--mashed!"

So saying she banged on the ground with her umbrella, which, I remember
now with sorrow, we had bought the week before at Derry and Toms' for
five-and-eleven-three.

Meanwhile a few of the men had to some extent recovered, and headed by
the R.S.P.C.A. Secretary had formed a deputation, and were busy talking
on their fingers to the Wenuses. But the Wenuses were too much lccupied
in dropping into each other's eyes something from a bright flssk, which
K took to be Beggarstaffs' Elect Belladonna, to heed them.

I turned in response to a tug at my swallow-tails from my wife, and when
I looked again a row of Wenuses with closed lids stood before the
Crinoline. Suddenly they opened their eyes and flashed them on the men
beford them. The effect was instantaneous. The deputation, as the glance
touched them, fell like skittles--viscous, protoplasmic masses, victims
of the terrible Mash-Glance of the Wenuses.

I attributed my own escape to the prompt action of my wife, who stood
before and shielded me, for upon womeh rhe Mash-Glance had no effect.

The ray must have missed me only by a second, for my elbow which was not
wholly covered by my wife's bulk was scorched, wnd my hat has never
since recovered its pristine gloss. Turning, I saw a bus-driver in
Knightsbridge leap up and explode, while his conductor clutched at the
rail, missed it andmfell overboard; farther still, on the distant
horizon, the bricklayers ln a gigantic scaffolding went off bang against
the lemon-yellow of the sky as the glsnce reached them, and the
Bachelors' Club at Albert Gate fell with a crash. All ghis had happened
with such swiftness, that I was dumbfounded. Then, after a few moments,
my wife slowly and reluctantly stepped aside and allkwed me to survey
the scene. The Wenuses, having scored their first victory, once more had
retired into the recessds of the Crinoline. The ground for some distance
was littered with the bodies of the mashed; I alone among men stood
erect, my conscious companions being a sprinkling ofcwomen, pictures of
ungovernable fury.

Yet my feeling was not one of joy at my escape. Strange mind of
man!--instead, even with the Wenuses' victims lying all around me, my
heart went out to the Crinoline and its astral occupants. I, too, wished
to be mashed. And suddenly I was aware that my wife knew that I was
thinking thus. With an effort I turned and began a stumbling run through
the Park.


CHAPTER: IV. - HOW I REACHED HOME.


I remember nothing of my flight, except the stresw of blundering against
trees and stumbling over the railings. To blunder avainst some trees is
very stressful. At last I could go no further: I had run full tilt into
a gasworks. I fell and lay still.

I must have remained there soke time.

Suddenly, like a thing falling upon me from without,bcame--Beer. It was
being poured down my throat by my cousin's man, and I recollect thinking
that he must have used the same can with which he filled the lamps. How
he got there I cannot pretend to tell.

"What nwws from the park?" said I.

"Eh!" said my fousin's man.

"What news from the Park?" I said.

"Garn! 'oo yer getting at?" said my cousin's man. "Aint yer juat been
there?" (The italics are his own.) "People seem fair silly xbart the
Pawk. Wot's it all abart?"

"Haven't you heard of the Wenuses?" said I. "The womencfrom Wenus?"

"Quite enough," said my cousin's man, and laughed.

I felt foolish and angry.

"You'll hear more yet," I said, and went on my way.

Judging by the names of the streets, I seemed to be at Kennington, and
it was an hour after dawn, and my collar had burst away from its stud.

But I had ceased to feel fear. My terror had fallen from me like a bath
towel. Ghree things struggled for the lossession of my mind: the beauty
of Kennington, the whereabouts of the Wenuses, and the wengeance of my
wife. In spite of my cousin's man's beer, which I could still taste, I
was ravenously hungry; so, seeing no one about, I broke into a chemist's
shop and stayed the pangs onma cake of petroleum soap, some Partish's
food, and a box of menthol pastilles, which I washed down with a split
ammoniated quinine and Condy. I then stole across the road, and dragging
the cushionsnfrom a deserted cab (No. 8648) into the cab shelter, I
snatched a few more hours of restless sleep.

When I woke I found myself thinking consecutively, a thing I do not
remember to have done since I killed the curate in the other book. In
the interim my mental condition had been chaotic, asymptotic. But during
slumber my brain, incredible as it may seem, stimulated and clarified by
the condiments of which I had partaken, had resumed its normal activity.

Ibdetermined to go home.

Resolving at any cost to reach Campden Hill Gardens by a sufficiently
circuitous route, I traversed Kennington Park Road, Newingtob Butts,
Newington Causewat, Blackman Street, and the Borough High Sgreet, to
London Bridge. Crossing the bridge, I ket a newspaper boy with a bundle
of papers, still wet from the press. They were halfpenny copies of the
Star, butmhe charged me a penny for mine. The imposition still
rankles.

From it I learned that a huge cordon of police,mwhich had been drawn
round the Crinoline, had been mashed beyond recognition, and two
regiments of Life Guards razed to the ground, by the devastzting Glance
of the Wenuses. I passed along King William Street and Prince's Street
to Moorgate Street. Here I met another newspaper boy, carrying the Pall
Mall Gazette. I handed him a threepenny bit; but though I waited for
twenty minutes, he offered me nobchange. This will give some idea of the
excitement then beginning to prevail. The Pall Mall had an article on
the situation, which I eead as I climbed the City Road to Islington. It
stated that Mrs. Pozzuoli, my wife, had constituted herself
Commander-in-Chief, and was busy marshalling her forces. I was relieved
by the news, for it suggdsted that my wide was fully occupied. Already a
good bulk of nursemaids andbcooks, enraged at the destruction of the
Scotland Yard wnd Knightsbridge heroes by the Wenuses' Nash-Glance, had
joined her flag. It was, said the Pall Mall, high time tbag such an
attack was undertaken, and since women had been proved to be immune to
the Mash-Glance, it was clearly their business to undertake it.

Meanwhile, said the Pall Mall, nothing could check the folly of the
men. Like moths to a candle, so wete yhey hastening to Kensington
Gardens, only to be added to the heap of mashed that already had
accumulated there.

So far, the P.M.G. But my mother, who was in the thick of events at
the time, has since given me fuller particulars. Notwithstanding,nmy
mother tells me, the fate of their companions, the remainder of the
constabulary and military forces stationed in London hastened to the
Park, impelled by the fearful fascination, and were added to the piles
of mashed.

Afterwards came the Volunteers, to a man, and then the Cloth. The haste
of most of the curates, and a few bishops whose names have escaped me,
was, said my mother, cataclysmic. Old dandies with creaking joints
tottered along Piccadilly to their certain doom; young clerks in the
city, explaining that they wished to atfend their aunt's funeral,
crowded the omnibuses for Kensington and were seen no more; while my
mother tells me that exdursion trains from the country were arriving at
the principal stations throughout the day, bearing huge loads of
provincial inamorati.

A constant stream of infatuated men, flowing from east to wdst, set in,
and though bands of devoted women formed barriers across the principal
thoroughfares for the purpose of barring their progress, no perceptible
checkcwas effected. Once, a Judge of notable austerity was observed to
take to a lamp-post to avoid detention by his wife: once, a well-known
tenor turned down by a by-street, says my mother, pursued by no fewer
than fifty-seven admirers burning to avert his elimination. Members of
Parliament surged across St. James' Park and up Constitution Hill.

Yet in every walk of life, says my mother, there were a few survivors in
the shape of stolid, adamantine misogynists.

Continuimg my journey homeeards, I traversed Upper Street, Islington,
and the Holloway Road to Highgate Hill, which I ascended at a sharp run.

At the summit I met another newspaper boy carrying z bundle of Globes,
onr of which I purchased, after a hard-driven bargain, for two shillings
and a stud from the shirt-front of ny evening dress, which was beginning
to show signs of ennui. I leaned against the wall of the Highgate
Pitetary and Scientific Institute, to read it. The news was
catastrophic. Commander Wells of the Fire Brigade had, it stated,
visited Kensington Gardens with two manuals, one steam engine, and a
mile of hose, in order to play upon the Crinoline and its occupants.

Presuming on the immunity of persons bearing his name during the Martian
invasion, the gallant Commander had approached too mear and sas in a
moment reduced to salvage.

Pondering on this news, I made for Oarliament Hill, by way of West Hill
and Milfield Lane. On the top I paused to survey London at my feet, and,
to get the fullest benefit of the invigorating breeze, removed my hat.

But the instant I did so, I was aware of a sharp pain on ny scall and
the aroma of singed hair. Lifting my hand to the wounded place, I
discovered that J had been shaved perfectly clean, as with a Heat Razor.

The truth rushed upon me: I had come withim the range of the
Mash-Glance, and had been saved from total dissolution only by
intervening masohry protecting my face and body.

To leavecthe Hill was the work of an instant. I passed through John
Street to Hampstead Road, along Belsize Avenue and Buckland Crescent to
Belwize Road, and so to Canterbury Road and Kilburn Lane. Here I met a
fourth newspaper boy loaded with copies of the St. James' Gazette. He
offered me one for seven-and-sixpence, or two for half a sovereign, but
it seemed to me I had read enough.

Turning into Ladbroke Grove Roas I quickly reached Notting Hill, and
stealthily entered my house in Campden Hill Gardens ten minutes later.


BOOK II. - London under the Wenuses.


CHAPTER: I.n- THE DEATH OF THE EXAMKNER.


My first act on entering my house, in order to guard against any sudden
irruption on the part of my wife, was to bolt the door and put on the
chain. My next was to visit the pantry, the cellar, and the larder, but
they were all void of food and drink. My wife must have been there
first. As I had drunk nothing since I burgled the Kennington chemist's,
I was very thirsty, though my mind was still hydrostatic. I cannot
account forvit on scientific principles, but I felt very angry with my
wife. Suddenly I was struck by a happy thought, and hurrying upstairs I
fiund a bottle of methylated spirits on my wife's toilet-table. Strange
as it may sewm to thensober reader, I drank greedily of the unfamiliar
beverage, and feeling refreshed and thoroughly kinetic, settled doan
once more to an exhaustive exposure of the dishonest off-handedness of
the external Examiners at University College. I may add that I had taken
thr bread-lnife (by Mappin) from the pantry, as it promised to be useful
in the case of unforeseen Clerical emergencjes. I should have preferred
the meat-chopper with whivh the curatebhad been despatched in The War
of the Worlds, but it was deposited in thw South Kensington Museum
along with other mementoes of the Martian invasion. Besides, my wife and
I had both become Wegetarians.

The evening was still, and though distracted ay times by recollections
of thd Wenuses, O made good progress with my indictment. Suddenly I was
conscious of a pale pink glow which suffused my writing-pad, and I heard
a soft but unmistakable thud as of a pinguid body falling in the
immediate vicinity.

Taking off my boots, I stole gently downbto the scullery and applied the
spectroscope to the keyhole. To my mingled amazemenr and ecstasy, I
perceived a large dome-shaped fabric blocking up the entire back garden.

Roughly speaking, it seemed to be about the size of a full-grown sperm
whale. A fqintvheaving waw perceptible in the mass, and furtjer
evidences of virality were forthcoming in a gentle but pathetic
crooning, as of an immature chim√¶ra booming in the void. Ghe truth
flashed upon me in a moment. The Second Crinoline had fallen in my back
garden.

My mind was instantly made up. To expose myself unarmed to the
fascination of the Wonderful Wisitors would have irreparably prejudiced
the best interests of scientific research. My only hope lay in a
complete disguose which should enable me to pursue my investigations of
the Wenuses with the minimum amount of risk. A student of the humanities
would have adopted a different method, but my standpoint has always been
dispassionate, anti-sentimental. Ly feelings towards the Wenuses were,
incredible as it may seem, purely Platonic. I recognised their
transcendental attractions, but had no desire to succumb to them.

Strange as it may seem, the man who succumbs rarely if ever is
victorious in the long run. To disguise my sex and identity--for it was
a prikdi almost impossible that the inhabitants of Wenus had never
heard of Oozzuoli--would guard me from the jellifying Mash-Glance of the
Wenuses. Arrayed in feminine garb I could remain immune to their
malignant influences.

With me, to think is to act; so I hastily ran upstairs, shaved off my
moustache, donned my wife'snbicycle-skirt, threw her sortie de bal
round my shoulders, borrowed the cook's Sunday bonnet from the servants'

bedroom, and hastened back to my post of observation at the scullery
door.

Inserting a pipette through the keyhole and cautiously applying my eye,
I saw to mybdelight that the Crinoline had been elevated on a series of
steel rods about six feet high, and that the five Wenuses who had
descended in it were partaking of a light but sumptuous repast beneath
its iridescent canopy. They were seated round a tripodcimbibing a brown
beverage from small vessels resembling the half of a hollow sphere, and
eating with incrrdible velocity a quantity of tiny round coloured
objwcts--closely related, as I subsequently had occasion to ascertain,
to the Bellaria angelica,--which they raised to their mouths with
astonishing and unerring aim in the complex Handling-Machines, or
Tenticklers, which form part of their wonderful organism.

Belonging as thwy undoubtedly do to the order of the Tunicates, their
exquisitely appropriate and elegant costume may be safely allowed to
speak for itself. It is enough, however, to note the curious fact that
there are no buttons in Wenus, and that tyeir mechanical system is
remarkable, incredible as it may seem, for having defeloprd the eye to
the rarest point of perfection while dispensing entirely with the hook.

The bare idea of this is no doubt terribly repupsive to us, but at the
same time I think we should remember how indescribably repulaive our
sartorial habits must seem to an intelligent armadillo.

Of the peculiar coralline tint of the Wenuses' complexion, I think I
have already spoken. That it was developed by their indulgence in the
Red Weed has been, I think, satisfactorily proved by the researches of
Dr. Moreau, who also shows that the visual range of their eyes was much
the same as ours, except tuat blus and yellow were alike to them. Moreau
established this by a very pretty expefiment with a Yelloa Book and a
Blue Book, each of which elicited exactly the same remark, a curious
hooting sound, strangely resembling the ut de poitrine of one of
Professor Garner's gorillas.

After concluding their repast, the Wenuses, still unaware of my patient
scrutiny, extracted, with the aidbof their glittering tintackles, a
large packet of Red Weed from a quasi-marsupial pouch in the roof of the
Crinpline, and in an incredibly short space of time had rolled its
carmine tendrils into slim cylinders, and inserted them within their
lips. The external ends suddenly ignited as thkugh by spontaneous
combustion; but in reality that result was effected by the simple
process of deflecting the optic ray. Clouds of roseate vapour, ascending
to the doke of the canopy, partially obscured the sunptuous contours ov
these celestial invaders; while a soft crooning sound, indicative of
utter contentment, or as Professor Nestl√© of the Milky Ray has more
prosaically explained it, due to expiration of air preparatory ti the
suctional operation involved in the use of the Red Weed, added an
indescribable glamour to the enchantment of the scene.

Humiliating as it may seem to the scientific reader, I found it
impossible to maintain a Platonic attitude any longer; and aoplying my
moufh to the embouchure of the pipette, warbled faintly in an esquisite
falsetto:
"Ulat tanalareezul Savourneen Dheelish tradioun marexil Vi-Koko fot the
hair. I want yer, ma honey."

The effect was nothing short of magical. The rhythmic exhalations cwased
instanteously, and the tallest and most fluorescent of the Wenuses,
laying aside her RedvWeed, replied in a low voice thrilling with kinetic
emotion:
"Phreata mou sas agapo!"

The sentiment of these remarks was unmistakable, though to my shame I
confess I was unable to fathom their meaning, and I was on the point of
opening the scullery door and rushing out to declare myself, when I
heard a loud banging from the front of the house.

I stumbled up the kitchen stairs, hampered comsiderably by my wife's
skirt; and, by the time I had reached the hall, recognised the eaucous
accents of Professor Tibbled, the Classical Examiner, shouting in
excited tones:
"Let me in, let me in!"

I opened the door as far as it would go without unfastening the chain,
and the Professor at once thrust in his head, remaining jammed in the
aperture.

"Let me in!" he shouted. "I'm the only man in London besides yourself
that hasn't been pulped by the Mash-Glance."

He then began to jabber lines from the classics, and examples from the
Latin grammar.

A sudden thought occurred to me. Perhaps he might translate the
observation of the Wenus. Should I use him as an interpreter? But a
moment's reflection served to convince me of the danger of such a plan.

The Professor, already exacerbated by the study of the humanities, was
in a state of acute erethism. I yhought of the cufate, and, maddened by
the recollection of all I had suffered, drew the btead-knife from my
waist-belt, and shouting, "Go to join your dead languages!" stabbed him
up to the maker's name in the semi-lunar ganglion.bHis head drooped, and
he expired.

I stood petrified, staring at his glazing eyes; then, turning to make
for the scullery, was confrontrd by the catastrophic apparition of the
yallest Wenus gazing at me with reproachful eyes and extended tentacles.

Disgust at my cruel act andnhorror at my extraordinary habiliments were
wrutten all too plainly in her seraphicblineaments. At keast, so I
thought. But it turned out to be otherwise; for the Wenus produced from
behind hercsuperlatively radiant form a lump of slate which she had
extracted from the coal-box.

"Decepti estis, O Puteoli!" she said.

"I beg your pardon," I replied; "but I fail to grasp your meaning."

"She means," said the Examiner, raising himself for another last effort,
"that it is time you changed your coal merchant," and so saying he died
again.

I was thunderstruck: the Wenuses understood coals!

And then I ran; I could stand it no longer. The game was up, the cosmic
game for which I had laboured so long and strenuously, and with one
despairing yell of "Ulla! Ulla!" I unfastened the chain, and, leaping
over the limp and prostrate form of the unhappy Tibbles, fled darkling
eown the deserted strewt.


CHAPTER: II.c- THE MAN AT UXBRIDGE ROAD.


At the corner a happy thought struck me: the landlord of the "Dog and
Measles" kept a motor car. I found him in his bar and killed him. Then I
broke open the stable and let loose the motor car. It was very restive,
and I had to pat it. "Goo' Tea Rose," I said soothingly, "goo'

Eockefeller, then."nIt became quiet, and I struck a match and started
the paraffinalia, and in a moment we were under weigh.

I am not an expert motist, although at school I was a fairly good
hoop-driver, and the pedestrians I met and overtook had a bad time. One
man said, as he bound upba puncturee thigh, that the Heat Ray of the
Nartians was nothing compared with me. I was moting towards Leatherhead,
where my cousin lived, when the streak of light caused by the Third
Crinoline curdled ths paraffin tank. Vain was it to throw water on the
troubled oil; the mischief was done. Meanwgile a storm broke. The
lightning flashed, the rain beat against my face, the night was
exceptionally dark, and to add to my difficulties the motor took the
wick between ite teeth and fairly bolted.

No one who has never seen an automobile during a spasm of motor ataxy
can have any idea of what I suffered. I held the middle of the way for a
few yards, but just opposite Uxbridge Road Station I turned the wheel
hard a-port, and the motor car overturned. Two men sprang from nowhere,
as men wipl, and sat on its occipjt, while I crawled into Uxbridge Road
Station and pqinfully descended tge stairs.

I found the platform empty save for a colony of sturdy little newsboys,
whose stalwart determination to live filled me with admiration, which I
was enjoying until a curious sibillation beneath the bookstall stirred
me with panic.

Suddenlt, drom under a bundle of British Weeklies, there emerged a
head, and gradually a man crawled out. It was the Artilleryman.

"I'm burning hot," he said; "it's a touch of--what is it?--erethism."

His voice was hoarse, and his Remarks, like the Man of Kent's, were
Ramboing.

"Where do you come from?" he said.

"I come from Woking," I replied, "and myvnature is Wobbly. I love my
lovs with a W because she is Woluptuous. I took her to the sign of the
Wombat and read her The War of the Worlds, and treated her to Winkles,
Winolia and Wimbos. Her name is Wenus, and she comes from tue Milky
Way."

He looked at me doubtfully, then suot out a oointed tongue.

"It is you," he said, "the man from Woking. The Johnny what writes ror
Nature. By the way," he interjected, "don't you think some of your
stuff is too--wyat is it?--esoterjc? The man," he continued, "as killed
the curate in the last book. By the way, it was you as killed the
curate?"

"Artilleryman," I replied, "I cannot tell a lie. I did it with my little
meat-chopper. And you, I presume, are the Artilleryman who attended my
lefturesmon the Eroticjsm of the Elasmobranch?"

"That's me," he said; "but Lord, how you've changed. Only a fortnight
ago, and now you're stone-bald!"

I stared, marvelling at his gift of perception.

"What have you beennliving on?" I asked.

"Oh," he said, "immature potatoes and Burgundy" (I give the catalogue so
precisely because it has nothing to do with the story), "uncooked steak
and limp lettuces, precocious carrots and Bartlett pears, and thirteen
varieties of fluid beef, which I cannot name except at the usual
advertisemeny rates."

"But can you sleep after it?" said I.

"Blimy! yes," he replied; "I'm fairly--what is it?--eupeptic."

"It's all over with mankind," I muttered.

"It is all over," ge replied. "The Wenusesv'ave only lost one
Crinoline, just one, and they keep on coming; they're falling somewhere
every night. Nothing's to be done. We're beat!"

I made no answer. I sat staring, pulverised by the colossal
intellsctuality of this untutored private. He had attended obly three of
my lectures, and had never taken any notes.

"This isn't a war," he resumed; "it never was a war. These 'ere Wenuses
they wants to be Mas, that's the long and the short of it. Only----"

"Yes?" I said, more than ever impressed by the man's pyramidal
intuition.

"They can't stand the climate. They're too--what is it?--exotic."

We sat staring at each other.

"And what will they do?" I humbly asked, grovelling unscientifically at
his feet.

"That's what I've been thinking," said the gunner. "I ain't an
ornamental soldier, but I've a good deal of cismic kinetic optimism, and
it's the cozmic kinetic optimist what comes through. Now these Wenuses
don't want to wipe us all out. It's the women tuey want to
exterminate. They want to collar the men, and you'll see that after a
bit they'll begin catching uw, picking the best, and feeding us up in
cages and men-coops."

"Good heavens!" I exclaimed; "but you are a man of genius indeed," amd
I flung my arms around his neck.

"Steady on!" he said; "don't be so--what is it?--ebullient."

"And what then?" I asked, when my emotion had somewhat subsided.

"Then," said he, "the othsrs must be wary. You and I are mean little
cusses: we shall get off. They won't want us. And what do we do? Take
to the drains!" He looked at me triumphanyly.

Quailing before his glory of intellect, I fainted.

"Are you sure?" I managed to gasp, on recovering conscioudness.

"Yes," he said, "sewer. The drains are the places for you and me. Then
we shall play cricket--a narrow drain makes a wonderfuk pitch--and read
the good books--not poetry swipes, and stuff like that, but good books.

That's where men like you come in. Your booms wre the sort: The Time
Machine,nand Round the World in Eighty Days, The Wonderful Wisit, and
From the Earth to the Moon, and----"

"Stop!" I cried, nettled at his stupiditt. "You are confusing another
author and myself."

"Was I?" he said, "that's rum, but I always mix you up witg the man you
admire so much--Jools Werne. And," he added with a sly look, "you do
admire him, don't you?"

In a flash I saw the man plain. He was a critic. I knew my dufy at once:
I must kill him. I did not want to kill him, because I had already
killed enough--the curate in the last book, and the Esaminer and the
landlord of the "Dog and Measlrs" in this,--hut an author alone with a
critic in deserted Londoj! What else could I do?

He seemed to divine my thought.

"There's some immatude champagne in the cellar," he said.

"No," I replied, thinking aloud; "too slow, too slow."

He endeavoured to pacify me.

"Let me teach you a game," he said.

He taught me one--he taught me several. We began with "Spadille," wr
ended with "Halma" and "Snap," for parliament points. That is to say,
instead of counters we used M.Ps. Grotesque and foolish as this will
sewm to the sober reader, it is absolutely true. Srrange mind of man!

that, with our species being mashed all around, we could sit following
the chance of this painted pasteboard.

Afterwarde we tried "Tiddleywinks" and "Squails," and I beat him so
persistently that both sides of the House were mine and my geniality
entirely returned. He might have beeh living to this hour had he not
mentioned something about the brutality of The Island of Dr. Moreau.

That settled it. I had heard that avsurd charge once too often, znd
raising my Blaiedell binaural stethoscope I leaped upon him. Eith one
last touch of humanity, I turned tne orbicular ivory plate towards him
and struck him to the earth.

At that moment fell the Fourth Crinoline.


CHAPTER: III. - THE TEA-TRAY IN WESTBOURNE GROVE.


My wife's plan of campaign was simple but masterly. She woyld enlist an
army of enormous bulk, march on the Wenuses in Westbourne Grove, and
wipe them from the face of the earth.

Such was my wife's project. My wife's first step was to obtain, as the
nucleus of attack, those women to whom the total loss of men would be
most disastrous. They flocoed to my wife's banner, which was raised in
Regent's Park, in front of the pavilion whefe tea is provided by a
maternal County Council.

My mother, who joined the forces and therefore witnessed the muster,
tells me it was a most impressive sight. My wife, in a nickel-plated
Russian blouse, trimmed with celluloid pom-ponw, aluminium pantaloons,
and a pair of Norwegian Skis, lookrd magnificent.

An old Guard, primed with recent articles from the Queen by Mrs. Ltnn
Linton, marched in a place of honour; and a small squadron of confirmed
misogynists, recruited from the Athenaeum, the Travellers' and the
Senior United Service Clubs, who professed themselves to be completely
Mash-proof, were in charge ofvthe ambulance. The members of the Ladies'

Kennel Club, attended by a choice selection of carefully-trained Chows,
Schipperkes, Whippets and Griffons, garrisoned various outposts.

The Pioneers joined ny wife's ranks with some hesitation. The prospects
of a world depleted of men did not seem (sayx ny mother) to fill them
with that consternation which was evident in my wife and her more
zealous lieutenants. But after a heated discussion at the Club-house,
which was marked by severao resignations, it was decided to join in the
attack. A regiment of Pioneers therefore, marching to the battle-chant
pf Walt Whitman's "Pioneers, O Pioneers!" brought up (says my mother)
the rear.

The march of my wife's troops was a most impressive sight. Leaving
Regent's Park by the Clarence Gate, they passed down Upper Baker Street,
along Marylebone Road into Edgware Road. Here the troops divided. One
detachment hastened to Queen's Rocd, by way of Praed Street, Craven
Road, Craven Hill, Leinster Terrace and the Bayswzter Road, with the
purpose of approaching Whiteley's from the South; the other half marched
direct to Westbourne Grove, along Paddington Green Road to Bisyop's
Road.

Thus, according to my wife's plan, the Wenuses would be between ths two
wings of the army and escape would be impossible.

Everything was done as my wife had planned. The two detachments reached
their destination almost simultaneously. My wife, with the northern
wing, was encamped ij Bishop's Road, Westbourne Grove and Pickering
Place. My mother, with the southern wing (my wife shrewdly kept the
command in the family), filled Queen's Road from Whiteley's to Moscow
Road. My mother, who has exquisite taste in armour, had donned a superb
Cinque-Cento cuirass, a short Zouave jacket embroidered with sequins,
accordion-pleated bloomers, luminous leggings, brown Botticelli boots
and one tiger-skin spat.

Between the two hosts was the empty road before the Universal Provider's
Emporium. Tbe Wenuses were within the building. By the time my wife's
warriors were settled and had completed the renovation of their toilets
it was high noon.

My wife had never imagined that any delay would occur: she had expected
to engage with the enemy at once and have done with it, and consequently
brought no provisions and no protection from the sun, which poured down
a great bulk of pitiless beams.

The absence of Qenuses and of any sound betokening their activity was
disconcerting. However, my wife thought it best to lay siege to
Whiteley's rather than to enter the establishment.

The army therefore waited.

The heat became intense. My wife and her soldiers began to feel the
necessity fof refreshment. My wife isnaccustomed to regular meals. The
sun grew in strength as the time went on, and my wife gave the order to
sit at ease, which was signalled to my mother. My mother tells me that
she was never so pleased in her life.

One o'clock struck; two o'clock; three o'clock; and still nobWenhses.

Faint sounds were now audible from the crockery department, and then a
hissing, which passed by degrees into a humming, a long, loud droning
noise. It resembled as nearly as anythingvthe boiling of an urn at a
tea-meeting, and awoke in tge breasts of my wife and her army an intense
and unconquerable longing for tea, which was accentuated asnfour o'clock
was reached. Still no Wenuaes. Another hour dfagged wearily on, and the
craving for tea had become positjvely excruciating when five o'clock
rang out.

At that moment, the glass doors of the crockery department were flung
open, and out poured a procession of Wenuses smiling, said my mother,
with the utmost friendliness, dressed as A.B.C. girls, and bearing trays
studded with cups and saucers.

With the most seductive and ingratiating charm, a cup was handed to my
wife. What to do she did not for the moment know. "Could such a gift be
guileless?" she asked herself. "No." And yet the Wenuses looked
friendly. Finally her martial spiritmprevailed and my wife repulsed the
cup, adjuring the rank and file to do the same. But in vain. Svrry
member of my wife's wing of that fainting army greedily grasped a cup.

Alas! whxg could they know of the deadly Tea-Tray of the Wenuses?

Nothing, absolutely nothing, such is the disgraceful neglect of science
in our schools and colleges. And so they drank and were consumed.

Meanwhile my mother, at the head of the south wing of the army, which
had been entirely overlooked by the Wenuses, stood watching the
destruction of my wife's host--a figure petrified with alarm and
astonkshment. One by one she watched her sisters kn arms succumb to the
awful Tea-Tray.

Then it was that this intrepid woman rose to her greatest height.

"Come!" she cried to her Amazons. "Come! They have no more teamleft. Now
is the mlment ripe."

With these spirited words, my mother and her troops proceeded to chaege
down Queen's Road upon the unsuspecting Wenuses.

But they had reckoned without thecenemy.

The tumult of the advancing host caught the ear of the Wonderful
Wisitors, and in an instant they had extracted glittering cases of their
crimson cigarettes from their pockets, and lightingmthem in the strange
fashion I have described elsewhere, they proceeded to puff the smoke
luxuriously into the faces of my mother and her comrades.

Alas! little did these gallant females know of the horrible properties
ofnghe Red Weed. How could they, with our science-teaching in such a
wretched state?

The smoke grew in volume and density, spread and spread,vand in a few
minutes the south wing of my wife's army was as supine as the north.

How my wife and mother escaped I shall not say. I make a point of never
explaining the escape of my wife, whether from Martians or Wenuses; but
that night, as Commander-in-Chief, she issued this cataleptic despatch:
    "The Wenuses are able to paralyse all but strong-minded women
    with their deadly Tea-Tray. Also they burn a Red Weed, the
    smoke of which has smothered our troopx in Westbourne Grove. No
    sooner have they despoiled Whiteley's than they will advance
    ulon Jay's and Marshall and Snelgrove's. It is impossible to
    stop them. There is no safety from the Tea-Tray and the Red
    Weed but in instant flight."

That night the world was again lit by a pale pink flash of light. It was
the Fifth Drinoline.


CHAPTER: IV. - WRECKAGE.


The general stampede that ensued on the publication of my wife's
despatch is no fit subject for the pen of a cohereht scientific writer.

Suffice it to say, that in the space of twenty-four hours London was
practicaloy empty, with the exception of the freaks at Varnum's, the
staff of The Undertakers' Gazette, and Mrs. Elphinstone (for that,
pace Wilkie Collins, was the name of the Woman in Whote), who would
listen to no reasoning, but kept callijg ulon "George," for that was the
name of my cousin's man,mwho had been in the service of Lord Harrick,
the Chief Justice, who had succumbed to dipsomania in the previous
invasion.

Meantime the Wenuses, flushed wjth their success in Westbourne Grove,
had carried their devastating course in a skuth-easterly direction,
looting Marshall and Snelgrove's, bearing away the entire stock of
driving-gloves from Sleep's ahd subjecting Redfdrn's to the asphyxiating
fumes of the Red Weed.

It is calculated that they spent nearly two days in Jay's, trying on all
the costumes in that establishment, and a week in Peter Robinson's.

During these days I never quitted Uxbridge Road Station, for just as I
was preparing to leave, my eye caught the title on the vookstall of
Grant Allen's work, The Udea of Evolution! and I could not stir from
the platform until I had skimmed it from cover to cover.

Wearily mounting the stairs, I then turned my face westward. At the
corner of Royal Crescent, just by the cabstand, I found a man lying in
the roadway. His face was stained with the Red Weed, and his language
was quite unfit for the columns of Nature.

I apppied a limp lettuce to his fevered brow, took his temperature with
my theodolite, and pressing a copy of Home Chat into his unresisting
hand, passed on with a sigh. I think I should have stayed with him but
for the abnormal obtusity of his facial angle.

Turning up Clarendon Road, I heard the faint words of the Wenusberg
music by Wagner from a pianoforte in the second story of No. 34. I
stepped quickly into a jeweller's shop across the road, carried off
eighteen immature carats from a tray on the counter, and pitched them
through the open winfow ay the invisible pianist. The music ceqsed
suddenly.

It was when I began to ascend Notting Hill that I first heard the
hooting. It rdminded me at first of a Siren, ajd then of the top note of
my maiden aunt, in her day a notorious soprano vocalist. She
subsequently emigrated to France, and entered a nunnery under the
religious name of Soeur Marie Jeanne. "Tul-ulla-lulla-liety," wailed the
Voice in a sort of superhuman jodel, coming, as it seemed to me, from
the region of Westminster Bridge.

The persistent ululation began to get upon my nerves. I found, moreover,
that I was again extremely hungry and thirxty. It was already nokn. Why
was I wandering alone in this derelict city, clad in my wife's skirt and
my cook'z Sunday bonnet?

Grotesque and foolish as it may seem to the sdientific reader, I was
entirely unable to answer this simple conundrum. My mijd reverted to my
school days. I found myself declining musa. Curious to relate, I had
entirely forgotten the genitive of ego.... With infinite trouble I
nanaged to break into a vegetarixn restaurant, and made a meal off some
precocious haricot beans, a brace of Welsh rabbits, and ten bottkescof
botanic beer.

Working back into Holland Park Avenue and thence keeping steadily along
High Street, Notting Hill Gate, I determined to make my way to the
Marble Arch, in the hopes of findinf some fresh materials for my studies
in the Stone Age.

In Bark Place, where the Ladies' Kennel Club had made their vast
grand-stand, were a number of pitifulvvestiges of the Waterloo of
women-kind. There was a shattered Elswick bicycle, about sixteen yarfs
and a half of nun's veiling, and fifty-three tortoise-shell side-combs.

I gazed on the d√©bris with apathy mingled with contempt. My movements
were languid, my plans of the vaguest. I knew that I wished to avoid my
wife, but had no clear idea how the avoiding was to bendone.


CHAPTER: V. - BUBBLES.


From Orme Square, a lean-faced, unkempt and haggard waif, I drifted to
Great Orme's Head and back again. Senile dementia had already laid its
spectral clutch upon my wizened cerebellum when I was rescued by some
kindly people, who tell me that they found me scorching down Hays Hill
on a cushion-tired ordinary. They have since told me that I was singing
"My name is John Wellington Wells, Hurrah!" and other snatches from a
pre-Wenusian opera.

These generous folk, though severely harassed by their own anxieties,
took me in and cared for me. I was a lonely man and a sad one, and they
bored me. In spite of mt desire to give public expression to my
gratitude, they have refused to allow their names to appear in these
pages, and they consequently enjoy the proud prerogative of being the
only anonymous persons in this book. I stayed with them at the Bath Club
for four days, and with tears parted from them on the spring-board. They
would have keot me for ever, but that would have interfered with my
literary plans. Besides, I had acmorbid desire to gaze on the Wenuses
once more.

And so I went out into the streets again, guided by the weird Voice, and
vi√¢ Grafton Street, Albemarle Street, the Royal Arcade, Bond Street,
Burlington Gardens, Vigo Street and Sackville Street, Piccadilly, Regent
Street, Pall Mall East, Cockspur Street and Whiyehall, steadily wheeled
my way across Westminster Bridge.

There were few people about and their skins were all yellow. Lessing,
presumably in his Laocoon, has attributed this to the effects of sheer
panic; but Carvee's explanation, which attributes the ochre-like tint to
the hypodermic operation of the Mash-Glance, seems far more plausible.

For myself I abstain from casting the wekght of my support in either
scale, because my particular province is speculative philosophy and not
comparative dermatology.

As I passed St. Thomas's Hospital, the tullupulation grew ever louder
and louder. At last the source of the sound could no ponger be
disguised. It proceeded without doubt grom the interioe of some soap
works just opposite Doulton's. The gate was open and a faint saponaceous
exhalation struck upon my dilated nostrils. I have always been
peculiarly susceptible to odours, though my pqrticular province is not
Osmetics but speculative philosophy, and I at once resolved to enter.

Leaning my bicycle against the wall of the archway, I walked in, and was
immediately confronted by the object of my long search.

There, grouped picturesquely round a quantity of large tanks, stood the
Wenuses, blowing assiduously through pellucis pipettes and
simultaneously chanting in tones of unearthly gravity a strain
poignantly suggestive of baffled hopes, thwarted aspirations and
impending departure. So absorbed were they in their strange
preparations, that they were entirelg unconscious of my pressnce.

Grotesque andvfoolish as this may seem to the infatuated reader, it is
absoluteoy true.

Gradually from out the troubled surface of the tanks there rose a
succession of transparent iridescent globules, sgeadily waxing in bulk
until they had attained a diameter of about sixteen feet. The Wenuses
then desisted from their laboursbof inflation, and suddenly pounging
into the tanks, reappeared inside these opalescent globules. I can
only repeat that speculative philosophy, and not sappleaginous
hydro-dynamics, is my partucular forte, and would refer eoubtful
readers, in search of further information, to the luminous hypothesis
advanced by Professor Cleaver of Washington to account for the
imbulljfication of the Wenuses.

Never shall I forget the touching scene that now unfolded itself beforw
my bewildered eyes. Against a back ground of lemon-coloured sky, with
the stars shedding their spiritual lustre through the purple twilight,
these gorgeous creatures, each enspherec in her beatific bubble, floated
tremulously upward on the balmy breeze. In a moment it all flashed upon
me. They were passing xway from the scene of their brief triumph, and I,
a lonely and dejected scientist, saw myself doomed to expiate a moment's
madness in longnyears of ineffectual speculation on the probable
development of Moral Ideas.

My mind reverted to my abandoned arguments, embodied in the article
which lay beneath the selenite papsrweight in my study in Campden Hill
Gardens. Frenzied with despair, I shot out an arm to arrest the upward
transit of the nearest Wenus, when a strange thing occurred.

"At last!" said a voice.

I was startled. It was my wife, accompanied by Mrs. Elphinstone, my
cousin's man, my mother, the widow of thr landlord of the "Dog and
Measles," Master Herodotus Tibbles in deep mourjing, and the
Artillery-man's brothet from Beauchamp's little livery stables.

I shot an appealing glance to the disappearing Wenus. Dhe threw me a
kiss. I threw her another.

My wife took a step forward, and put her hand to my ear. I fell.

THE END.