-Masterpieces in Colour - BOUCHER-


CHAPTER: ANNEXATION OF THE TRANSVAAL.


IT is vain to dispute the fact that those Puritan Fathers—who, upon one
occasion, held a meeting, and resolved first that the earth was the
Lord’s, and the fulness thereof; secondly, that it was the heritage of
the saints; and that thirdly, they were the saints, and were, therefore,
justified in depriving the natives of their grounds, and in taking
possession of them themselves—had a full share of that English faculty of
appropriation which has made England the mistress of the seas, and for a
while, almost, the ruler of the world; and, as Englishmen, we cannot say
that on the whole that wholesale system, which has planted the British
flag in every quarter of the globe, has been disastrous to the
communities ruled over, or dishonourable to the nation itself.  In some
cases undoubtedly we have acted unjustly; in some cases the lives and
happiness of millions have been placed in incompetent hands; in some
cases we have had selfish rulers and incapable officers; but India and
Canada and the West Indian Islands and Australia and New Zealand are the
better for our rule.  An Englishman may well be proud of what his
countrymen have done, and it becomes us to review the past in no narrow,
carping, and censorious spirit.  We have spent money by millions, but
then we are rich, and the expenditure has not been an unproductive one.

We have sacrificed valuable lives, but the men who have fallen have been
embalmed in the nation’s memory, and the story of their heroism will
mould the character and fire the ambition and arouse the sympathies of
our children’s children, as they did those of our fathers in days gone
by; and yet there is a danger lest we undertake responsibilities beyond
our means, and find ourselves engaged in contests utterly needless in the
circumstances of the case, and certain to result in a vain effusion of
blood and expenditure of money.  As far as South Africa is concerned,
this is emphatically the case.  Originally the Cape Settlement was but a
fort for the the coast.  The country is subject to drought, and seems
chiefly to be inhabited by diamond diggers, ostrich farmers, and wool
growers.  Its great agricultural resources are undeveloped, because
labour is dear, and all carriage to the coast is expensive.  The English
never stop in the colonies, but return to England as soon as they have
made a fortune.  Living is quite as dear as in England, and in many parts
dearer.  In the Cape Colony, the chief amusements of all classes are
riding, driving, shooting, and billiards.  In the interior there are fine
views to be seen, and in some quarters an abundance of game.  The
thunderstorms are frightful, the rivers, dry in summer, are torrents in
winter.  The droughts, the snakes, the red soil dust, and the Kaffirs,
are a perpetual nuisance to all decent people.  “Although South Africa is
a rising colony,” writes Sir Arthur Cunynghame, “I hardly think it offers
to the emigrant the chances which he would obtain in Australia or New
Zealand.  South Africa is not a very rich country.  Labour is hard to
obtain, and it will be years before irrigation can be carried on a
sufficient scale to make agriculture a brilliant Success.  Nevertheless,
land is so abundant that the energetic colonist is sure, at least, to
make a living, and provided he does not drink, has a good chance of
becoming a rich man.”  A great deal of money is made by ostrich farming
and sheep grazing, but they are occupations which require capital.  As to
cereals, it pays better to buy them than to grow them.  A cabbage appears
to be a costly luxury, and the price of butter is almost prohibitive.

“South Africa,” wrote a Saturday Reviewer recently, “is the paradise of
hunters, and the purgatory of colonists.”  The remark is not exactly
true, but for all practical purposes it may be accepted as the truth.  If
this be so, how is it, then, it may be asked, we English have been so
anxious to get possession of the country?  The answer is, We hold the
Cape of Good Hope to be desirable as a port of call and harbour of refuge
on our way to India; but the opening of the Suez Canal has changed all
that, and the reason for which we took it from the Dutch in 1806 does not
exist now.  Whether the country has ever made a penny by the Cape remains
to be proved.

In taking possession of the Cape of Good Hope, we found there a people
whom we have annexed against their will, and of whom we have made bitter
enemies.  These were the original Dutch settlers, or Boers, a primitive,
pastoral people, with a good deal of the piety of the Pilgrim Fathers,
and who set to work to exterminate the pagans much after the fashion of
the Jews, of whom we read in the Old Testament.  Their plan of getting
rid of the native difficulty was a very effective one.  They either made
the native a slave, or they drove him away.  Mr. Thomas Pringle, one of
our earliest colonists, says, “Their demeanour towards us, whom they
might be supposed naturally to regard with exceeding jealousy, if not
dislike, was more friendly and obliging than could, under all the
circumstances, have been expected.”  They were, he says, uncultivated,
but not disagreeable, neighbours, exceedingly shrewd at bargain making;
but they were civil and good-natured, and, according to the custom of the
country, extremely hospitable; and the same testimony has been borne to
them by later travellers.  They lived as farmers, and the life agreed
with them.  The men are finely made, and out of them a grand empire might
be raised.  In 1815 they made an effort to shake off the British yoke.  A
Hottentot, named Booy, appeared at the magistrate’s office at Cradock,
and complained of the oppressive conduct of a Boer of the name of
Frederick Bezuidenhout.  Inquiry was accordingly made.  The Boer admitted
the facts, but, instead of yielding to the magistrate’s order, he boldly
declared that he considered this interference between himself and his
Hottentot to be a presumptuous innovation upon his rights, and an
intolerable usurpation of authority.  He told the field-cornet that he
set at defiance both himself and the magistrate who had sent him on this
officious errand, and, to give further emphasis to his words, he fell
violently upon poor Boor, gave him a severe beating, and then bade him go
and tell the civil authorities that he would treat them in the same
manner if they should dare to come upon his grounds to claim the property
of a Hottentot.  It must be remembered that when the Boers were handed
over to us, without their leave or without their consent being in any way
asked, each Boer had perfect control over the liberty and life and limb
of every Hottentot under his control.  It was only thus he believed his
property was safe, and his throat uncut.  But to return to Bezuidenhout.

The Cape Government could not allow his defiance to pass unheeded.  An
expedition was sent out against him, and he was shot.  The affair excited
a great sensation in the country.  At a numerous assemblage of the Boers
in the neighbourhood, it was resolved to revenge his death.  They did
more; they resolved to be independent of the hateful British yoke; but,
it is needless to add, in vain.  England, after putting down Napoleon,
and triumphing at Waterloo, was in no mood to be defied by a handful of
Dutch farmers in a distant quarter of the globe.  But the Cape Government
had Kaffir wars to fight, and they could not afford to treat the Boers as
absolute enemies, and they were rewarded with a large portion of the
territory, won from the Kaffirs in 1819.  But this was not sufficient for
their earth-hunger.  They crossed the boundaries, and, with their lives
in their hands, planted themselves among the savages.  In 1838 they went
off still further from British rule.  In that year the slaves were
manumitted, and a sum of money was voted as a compensation to the Boers.

To the shame of the British Government, it must be confessed that the
equivalent was never paid them.  Despairing of ever receiving it, they
sold their rights to Jews and middlemen, and trekked far out into the
country into the districts known as Griqualand, Natal, the Orange Free
State, and the Transvaal.  It is because we have followed them there,
when there was no need to have done so, that we are now engaged in a
costly and bloody war.  First we seized Natal; then we took possession of
the Diamond Fields, and our last act was the annexation of the Transvaal.

How far this system of annexation is to spread, it is impossible to say.

It is equally impossible to state what will be its cost in treasure and
in men.  It seems equally difficult to say upon whom the blame of this
annexation system rests.  It really seems as if we were villains, as
Shakespeare says, by necessity and fools by a divine thrusting on.  We
should have left the Boers alone.  They were not British subjects, and
did not want to be such.  Natal was not British territory when they
settled there, neither was the Orange Free State Territory; and, at any
rate, in 1854 their independence, which had been persistently fought for,
and nobly won, was acknowledged by the British Government as regards the
Orange Free State and the Transvaal.  Surely in South Africa there was
room for the Englishman and the Boer, and if it had not been for the
dream of Imperialism, which seems to dominate the brain of our colonial
rulers, the two nations might have lived and flourished side by side.

The Boer, at any rate, has made himself at home on the soil.  It agrees
with him physically.  In the Orange State and the Transvaal he made good
roads, and built churches and schools and gaols, and turned the
wilderness into a fruitful field.  In reply to the English who pleaded
for annexation, he said, “We fled from you years ago; leave us in peace.

We shall pay our debts early enough; your presence can but tend to
increase them, and to drive us through fresh wanderings, through new
years of bloodshed and misery, to seek homes whither you will no longer
follow us.  We conquered and peopled Natal; you reaped the fruits of that
conquest.  What have you done for that colony?  Do you seek to do with
our Transvaal as you have done with it, to make our land a place of
abomination, defiled with female slavery, reeking with paganism, and
likely, as Natal is, only too soon to be red with blood?”

“The Transvaal,” wrote one who knew South Africa well—the late Mr. Thomas
Baines—“will yet command the admiration of the world for the
perseverance, the primitive manliness and hardihood of its pioneers.”  As
a proof of advancing prosperity, when he was there in 1860 its one-pound
notes had risen in value till four were taken for a sovereign, and
several hundred pounds’ worth had been called in and publicly burnt upon
the market-place.  It is a proof of the simplicity of the people that on
that occasion the Boers and Doppers (adult Baptists) crowded wrathfully
around, and bitterly commented on the wastefulness of their Government in
wickedly destroying so much of the money of their Republic; while others,
of more advanced views, discussed the means of raising them still further
in value, and sagely remarked that because they had been printed in
Holland the English would not take them, but that if others were printed
in London they would certainly be as good as a Bank of England note.  In
the Volksraad (House of Commons) now and then some amusing scenes
occurred.  The progressive party wanted, one day, to pass some measure
for the opening and improvement of the country, when the opponents,
finding themselves in a minority, thought to put the drag on by bringing
forward an old law that all members should be attired in black cloth
suits and white neckerchiefs.  This had the immediate effect of
disqualifying so many that the business of the House could not be legally
conducted; but an English member who lived next door, slipped out, donned
his Sunday best, with a collar and tie worthy of a Christy Minstrel, and
resumed his sitting with an army that completely dismayed the
anti-progressionists.  The latest authority, Sir Arthur Cunynghame,
testifies to this simplicity as still the characteristic of the Dutch.

“Some little time before our arrival,” he writes, “a German conjurer had
visited this distant little village, when the Doppers were so alarmed at
his tricks that they left the room in which he was exhibiting, and,
assembling in prayer, entreated to be relieved of the devil who had come
amongst them.”  He tells the story of a Jew, who in dealing with a Boer
had made a miscalculation, which the Boer pointed out, appealing to his
ready-reckoner.  Not in the least taken aback, the Israelite replied,
“Oh, this is a ready-reckoner of last year!” and the poor Boer was done.

A further illustration of their simplicity is to be found in the fact
that when they trekked from the Cape they fancied that they were on their
way to Egypt, and, having reached in the Transvaal a considerable river
which falls into the Limpopo, thought they were there, and called it the
Nyl—a name which it still retains.  In accordance with their serious
teaching, they gave Scriptural names to their settlements and villages;
and if they were severe on the natives, and ruled them with a rod of
iron, did not the Jews act in a similar manner to the Hivites and the
Hittites, and did not Samuel command Saul to hew Agag in pieces before
the Lord?

It is to be feared that the Boers have never had justice done to them by
our rulers.  We had no claim on them.  It was to escape British rule that
they, with their wives and children, their men-servants and
maid-servants, their oxen, and their sheep, their horses and their asses,
went forth into the wilderness.  Even Mr. Trollope admits that when they
took possession of Natal, “there was hardly a native to be seen, the
country having been desolated by the King of the Zulus.  It was the very
place for the Dutch, fertile without interference, and with space for
every one.”  There they would have settled, as did the Pilgrim Fathers on
the other side of the Atlantic, and built up a flourishing State, but we
followed them, and drove them away.  If they had been allowed to remain,
the English Government and the English people would have been saved a
good deal of trouble.  At any rate, we should never have heard of the
native difficulty in Natal—the difficulty which keeps away the emigration
required to develop the resources of a country happily situated in many
respects; the difficulty which must ever be felt by a handful of English
in the presence of a horde of polygamous and untutored savages who will
not work, and who, alas! are not ashamed to beg.  Natal, had the Dutch
been left peaceably in possession of it, would have been by this time the
home of a God-fearing, civilised community, instead of swarming with
Pagans who have fled there from the cruelties of their native kings, and
who learn to treat their protectors with insolent contempt.  In Natal,
the English shopkeeper has to speak to his customers in their own
language.  Where the Boers hold sway it is otherwise.  In the Dutch parts
of the Cape Colony, Captain Aylward writes: “The coloured people are
tame, submissive, and industrious, speaking the language of their
instructors and natural masters.  As I proceeded further on my journey
through the Transvaal,” continues the same writer, “I saw in various
directions gardens, fruitful orchards, and small, square houses in the
possession of blacks, who were living in a condition of ordinary
propriety, having abandoned polygamy and other horrid customs resulting
from it.  So great an improvement I had not noticed during any part of my
previous residence in Natal.”  It is a pity that we have made the Boers
our enemies; and the worst of it is, in their determination not to be
English the women, according to Captain Aylward, have been a wonderful
aid to the men.  They have suffered for that spirit.  It has called them
from the homesteads built by their fathers, the rich lands where the
grapes clustered and the sheep fattened, and the fields were white for
the harvest.  In 1841 Major Charteris wrote: “The spirit of dislike to
English rule was remarkably dominant among the women.  Many of those who
had formerly lived in affluence but were now in comparative want, and
subject to all the inconveniences accompanying the insecure state in
which they were existing, having lost, moreover, their husbands and
brothers by the savage, still rejected with scorn the idea of returning
to the colony.  If any of the men began to drop or lose courage they
urged them on to fresh exertions, and kept alive the spirit of resistance
within them.”  Sir Arthur Cunynghame has nothing but praise for the
Boers.  On his way to the Diamond Fields he stopped at Hanover, which, he
says, “has a grand appearance, the Dutch minister’s house, standing in
the centre, being quite a palace.  It was built by the subscriptions of
his parishioners.  The honours which the Dutch lavish on the ministry are
worthy of remark.”  Equally worthy of remark is their hospitality and
their piety.  The farmer gives his guest the best entertainment he can
provide, and “before the family retires to rest the large Bible is opened
and the chapter appropriate to the day is read.”  On another occasion,
Sir Arthur’s party encamp near the residence of a rich Dutch farmer, who
refused admission to his house and would not even sell them an egg; yet
he records the fact that, “late in the evening the sounds of the Evening
Hymn floated over the plain, the nasal twang of the patriarch being
distinctly heard leading the choir, while female voices, with their
plaintive notes, chimed in.  It is pleasant,” adds Sir Arthur, “to hear
in these lone lands such evidence of a religions sentiment pervading the
community, and it is an assurance that the people are contented and
happy.”  Sir Arthur writes:—“There are no finer young men in the world
than the young Dutch Boers, who are generally of immense height and size,
and very hardy.  Their life is spent in the open air by day, and
frequently at night they sleep on the veldt, with no tent or covering.

Men more fit for the Grenadier Guards, as to personal appearance, could
not be found.  Some of them are plucky.  A Boer had part of his hand
blown off by the bursting of his gun.  Having no doctor near, he directed
his son to bring his hammer and chisel, and shape off his fingers.”  As
an Irishman, Captain Aylward is enthusiastic as regards the personal
charms of the ladies.  Many of the elder ones even, he admits, are not
uncomely, and in the wild neighbourhood of Lydenberg itself, he tells us,
are to be seen some bearing traces of beauty of no ordinary character,
whose lives, he says, somewhat unnecessarily, are useful, adorning, and
cheering the homes of their husbands and children.  These people are
somewhat unlettered, and very phlegmatic.  “They do not wish,” writes Sir
Arthur Cunynghame, “to move ten miles from their own door, nor to see one
who comes from ten miles beyond it.”  Their moral discipline also seems
somewhat severe.  “In the little fort,” writes Captain Aylward, “was an
English storekeeper, named Glynn, whose daughters had a piano, on which
they would occasionally play dance and other profane music.  This was a
source of great annoyance to their pious neighbours, who, in many
respects, resembled our early Puritans.  It was requested that the piano
should be silenced, as the music might tempt the anger of Heaven if
persisted in during a time of war and trial.  If a girl in the laager
were frivolous or light in her conduct, she was liable to be arrested,
and brought for trial before the Fathers of the Church, from whom she
might receive a severe caution, or even the punishment of removal.”  At
Lydenberg, at the time of Sir Arthur’s visit, an altercation had taken
place on the unrighteousness of dancing, for which a party was tried by
the Synod; but an appeal was made to the Court, and this appeal formed an
important epoch in the history of the town.  To show how primitive these
Boers are, let us take the following story:—A schoolmaster was lately
appointed in Zoutspanberg.  One of his earliest lessons was to teach the
children that the world turned upon its own axis.  He also endeavoured to
make them understand the revolutions of the heavenly bodies.  The
children went home, and were impertinent to their parents, and told them
that the earth went round the sun.  The elders of the district met, and
consulted regarding these new doctrines, and finally agreed to refer the
subject to the minister, who requested the schoolmaster to explain.  The
schoolmaster said, “I teach them nothing but the movements of the
heavenly bodies, and that the earth revolves round the sun.”  The
minister answered, “Well, this may be true, no doubt, and what the earth
does in Holland; but it would be more convenient at present if in the
Zoutspanberg you would allow the sun still to go round the earth for a
few years longer.  We do not like sudden changes in such matters.”  The
schoolmaster took the hint, and the sun continued to go round the earth
as usual.  The power of the minister of a parish is very great.  A great
deal depends upon him for the improvement and well-being of the town.

Many a time it was said to Sir Arthur, when he observed that a town was
flourishing, “Yes, we are fortunate in our minister;” and when it was
falling back it was, “Ah! all will alter when we get rid of our present
minister.”

It is to the credit of these people that they have a consistent native
policy.  No faith is to be held with Rome.  “Delenda est Carthago” is
their motto.  They leave the natives to quarrel among themselves, while
our English policy has been to play off one petty savage chief against
another, and to arm and strengthen the natives with whom we are
ultimately to fight.  The natives see through this, and argue, as Sir
Arthur Cunynghame testifies, that the English fear them, else why, they
ask, do they give them such high wages? or why do the Government allow
them to buy arms?  It is some such feeling that has urged on Cetewayo
into his present hostile attitude.  He considered that we were his allies
against the Boers, and thought we annexed the Transvaal for him and his
savage followers.  Up to the annexation he and the English were on
friendly terms.  It seems that the Boers are reluctant to fight for
English rule, and some of the colonial papers hint that they are a danger
and a menace.  No wonder, as we have always sacrificed them to the
natives.  The Free States newspaper complains that “our British
neighbours have established at the Diamond Fields free trade in guns and
ammunition, in spite of all treaties with the Republic, and even in spite
of their own professed policy in the Cape Colony.  Griqualand West
permits the supply of guns and ammunition to the natives—Zulus and
Basutos—without hindrance, whilst Earl Carnarvon requests all South
Africa to meet in a friendly conference, because of the native question
and Zulu difficulty.  British traders supply Her Majesty’s enemies, and
our enemies too, with guns and ammunition to any extent, in order that
these enemies may be better prepared to fight us when the next struggle
may commence; and, worst of all, British commerce, represented by
colonial shopkeepers and merchants, who, to fill their own pockets, would
not for a moment hesitate to bring ruin on the colonial farmers and
Republican Boers, cry out that it is preposterous to stop the trade in
guns.”  Assuredly, the Boers may well complain of the Imperial policy in
South Africa.  There is little to be said for our dealings with them
after they had removed out of our rule.  That we had no right to annex
the Diamond Fields, the sum we offered in compensation may be considered
as fair evidence; and the annexation of the Transvaal, besides being a
crime, was a blunder for which we are now paying dearly in person and in
purse.  It has bean shown that the cry for annexation raised was merely
“an ignorant expression of the dissatisfaction of a mean and contemptible
minority”—a set of greedy speculators and disreputable office-seekers,
who grossly deceived the English officials, who were not naturally averse
to the power and prestige a new command would give them.  The Republic
was not insolvent, nor was it unable to hold its own.  In the war with
the Basutos, contrary to the assertion of Mr. Trollope, the Burghers were
everywhere victorious, nor was it stained with slavery, as, if so, when
Sir Theophilus Shepstone annexed it, we should have heard of a wholesale
emancipation; nor was the step taken by the will of the people.  The only
argument for the step was that we were obliged to take it in order to
prevent our own house catching fire, and the result has been the
conflagration we were so anxious to avoid.  Sir Theophilus Shepstone
annexed the Transvaal, and our house caught fire in the Cape Colony, and
in Griqualand West, and Secocoeni broke out; and, lastly, we have the
tragedy of Isandula.  We shall never be safe till we have the Transvaal,
argued Sir Theophilus Shepstone and his friends.  Now, argue the latter,
that we have the Transvaal, we are bound to go to war.  This reasoning
was irresistible to Lord Chelmsford, who, in a despatch dated September
last, says, “So long as Natal and the Transvaal had separate interests,
the policy of the chief of the Zulu nation was to play off the former
against the latter. . . .  With the annexation of the Transvaal this
state of things virtually came to an end.”

Ex uno disce omnes.  One example will suffice of the way in which that
theory of dominion universal, from, the Cape to the Zambesi, which
appears to dominate over the official Englishman, when he has anything to
do with Africa, acts in a mischievous manner, may be seen in the case of
Griqualand East, formerly called No Man’s Land, which was some years
since a sort of neutral territory.  In time the Griquas, or bastards,
settled there.  They were an industrious people, and far more advanced in
civilisation than any other native tribe.  They had large flocks of
cattle and sheep, and were wealthy, with good furniture and houses, and
prospered under the rule of their President, Adam Kok.  Many new
buildings, such as churches and schools, were being erected when Sir
Arthur Cunynghame visited them, and many new stores put up.  He writes:
“In the afternoon we attended the native service carried on in the Dutch
language.  It was impossible for me to follow it; in fact, the discovery
that the sermon related to the Prodigal Son formed the limit of my
knowledge of what was going on.  The congregation appeared attentive, and
the clergyman in earnest.”  Not long after the visit, it was decided by
the British that they should annex the country, and Adam Kok was
pensioned off with a thousand a year, which he did not, however, long
enjoy, as he was soon killed by a carriage accident.  At a meeting of the
people on the subject, Captain Adam Kok complained, as, indeed, he had
every reason to do, of the hasty and arbitrary manner in which Government
were assuming authority in his country.  They had their own cannon,
fire-arms, and ammunition, bought with their own money, and after being
left for thirteen years entirely to their own resources, without any
preliminary notice he said, the Cape Government stepped coolly in and
took possession of them and their property.  When the Government laid out
the Kat River Settlement of Hottentots, they gave the settlers seed,
corn, ploughs, and various other things to help them.  But the Griquas
were not so treated.  They had to do everything for themselves, and we
were bound to regard them not as enemies to be put down, but as friendly
allies to be encouraged and preserved.

How long is this system to be pursued?  The Transvaal is getting into a
worse state every day.  It has vast resources which cannot be developed.

It is importing flour, when it might be a great corn-producing country.

It has no manufactures, and its exports are few.  Captain Aylward writes:
“The Boer party complain bitterly of the annexation.  They say our
liberties have been unnecessarily taken from us, and our country annexed,
not only against the will of the majority, but in utter defiance of Lord
Carnarvon’s instructions, which state that no such proclamation shall be
issued by you (Sir Theophilus Shepstone), unless you shall be certain
that the inhabitants, or a sufficient number of them, or the Legislature,
desire to become our subjects.”  The Boers also object to the annexation,
because they believe that the arguments put forward by Sir Theophilus
Shepstone are not borne out by facts, and they are still more angry
because they believe the annexation was brought about by false pretences,
accompanied and strengthened by attacks made upon their honour and
character by a party Press interested in their destruction.  They say
further, that the terms of the Annexation Proclamation have not been
adhered to, and this party, undoubtedly the strongest in the country,
appeals to England to do them justice and restore to them their country.

The railway party who want a connection with the natural outlet of the
Transvaal, Delagoa Bay, are discontented, and so are the very men who
were the first to applaud annexation.  As it is, it seems, the Transvaal
must end either in anarchy or martial law, and will be a heavy burden on
the British taxpayer for many years to come.  Mr. Trollops himself admits
that it is not easy to justify what we have done in the Transvaal.  “If
there be,” he writes, “any laws of right and wrong, by which nations
should govern themselves in their dealings with other nations, it is hard
to find the law in conformity with which that act was done.”  And Mr.
Trollope is right.  Undoubtedly it was an act of injustice of which we
have not yet seen the bitter end.  There is little chance of that
injustice being undone.  The Dutch are poor and far away.  It is the old,
old story of the wolf and the lamb over again.  We have made so little of
South Africa, we might leave the Boers alone.  All that we can say
against them is that when it was the fashion for West Indian planters to
maltreat their slaves, they often did the same.

The Boers are becoming more discontented, as well they may, and there is
no sign of this discontent ceasing.  In the beginning of February they
held a large meeting at Wonderfontein to receive the report of the visit
of the deputation, Messrs. Kruger and Joubert, to Europe.  The latter is
reported to have said:—“My brethren and fellow-countrymen,—I am very glad
to see you all spared by God in this our beloved country.  I wish and
hope the best, also, with regard to your families.  You have deputed us
on a mission of the utmost importance to yourselves.  I know you are
awaiting our report with deep anxiety.  I know your feelings and your
wishes—aye, I share your anxiety, and, therefore, I will not detain you
long by words.  Know, then, that I cannot report to you so favourably as
you had expected that the all-powerful British Empire had acknowledged
your rights so that you may, as had been said by Joshua to Caleb, be
strong and possess the country which God has given you.  No, brethren,
England has annexed your country, and will keep it, and I may not mislead
you by not telling you that you cannot stop the superior power of
England.  Therefore, take heed for yourselves, and don’t do anything of
which you may repent for ever, and which may plunge yourselves, your
families, and others into deeper misery still.  Pray to God for wisdom;
be prudent, and act wisely.  Who knows, God may help us and grant relief.

You had sent us to ask back your independence.  What we have done for it
you already know from the newspapers, and the rest you will learn from
the books or pamphlets which we had printed.  In how far you will decide
that we have done our duty we leave to you.  I do not care for myself,
but I do for the country, and the people, and where I feel my own
shortcomings and weakness, I am satisfied before God and my conscience
that I, if I have not obtained what you, what I, and the people have
desired, I have done for it what I could.  And with this I wish God’s
greatest blessing for yourselves and the country.”  Other speeches were
delivered of a more angry and exciting character.  It was intimated that
we got our Empire by robbery.  Mr. W. Pretorious said the High
Commissioner promised much, but all he wanted was to get back his
independence.  Said another speaker, amidst enthusiastic cheers, England
might annex and oppress them, but it could never give them an English
heart.  Some resolutions were moved, of which the following was one:—“The
committee, supported by the people, cannot be satisfied with the reply of
the English Minister, Sir Michael Hicks Beach, and resolve to continue to
protest against the injustice committed, and, further, to devise ways and
means with the people for attaining their object.”  After the meeting,
some people having torn to pieces the printed copies of Sir Bartle
Frere’s letter, Mr. Joubert strongly condemned the stupid proceedings,
and requested the people to act wisely and with judgment.  On the Sunday
religious services were held, and on Monday a further meeting took place.

Ultimately it was resolved, “That the committee, having learned the
opinion of the people expressed in their memorials, and the expressed
wish of the people not to submit to British supremacy, but to abide by
the protest of April 11, 1877, proposes to the committee a deputation to
acquaint Sir Bartle Frere therewith, and at the same time to assure His
Excellency of their full co-operation for the advancement of the whole of
South Africa, provided the annexation be rescinded.”  Clearly, when we
have settled with Cetewayo, we shall have a little trouble with the free
people of the Transvaal.  According to the Natal Mercury, we had better
leave them alone.

The following, says the Natal Witness, is a translation of the oath of
mutual allegiance taken by a great number of respectable Transvaal Boers
at the Wonderfontein meeting.  It will strike most people that this oath
is the oath of men who are to be respected.  It will also strike them
that such men are likely to secure the sympathy of the great bulk of the
English nation:—“In the presence of Almighty God, the Searcher of hearts,
and praying for His gracious assistance and mercy, we, burghers of the
South African Republic, have solemnly agreed, for us and for our
children, to unite in a holy covenant, which we confirm with a solemn
oath.  It is now forty years ago since our fathers left the Cape Colony
to become a free and independent people.  These forty years were forty
years of sorrow and suffering.  We have founded Natal, the Orange Free
State, and the South African Republic, and three times has the English
Government trampled on our liberty.  And our flag, baptized with the
blood and tears of our fathers, has been pulled down.  As by a thief in
the night has our free Republic been stolen from us.  We cannot suffer
this and we may not.  It is the will of God that the unity of our fathers
and the love to our children should oblige us to deliver unto our
children, unblemished, the heritage of our fathers.  It is for this
reason that we here unite, and give each other the hand as men and
brethren, solemnly promising to be faithful to our country and people,
and looking unto God, to work together unto death for the restoration of
the liberty of our Republic.  So truly help us, God Almighty.”

Till Sir Bartle Frere appeared upon the scene at the Cape men ridiculed
the idea of another Kaffir war.  Now all is changed.  The following is an
extract from a letter, dated February 12, received by a gentleman in
London from a well-known merchant at the Cape:—“Who is responsible for
the fearful loss of life which has taken place in Zululand?  This is now
the question of all questions; but we fear that it will drop out of
sight, as the iniquitous proceedings perpetrated here during the late
so-called war have done.  The Zulus will, of course, be crushed, as
‘Might is Right’ seems now to be England’s motto.  Sir Bartle Frere and
Lord Chelmsford must answer for the part they have played, and for the
consequences of the tragedy they have caused.  Never was there a greater
mistake than the Frere-Sprigg native policy.  We have not right on our
side, and we have not the force to carry it out, even if we had.  We have
made enemies of the loyal Gaikas, of the Basutos, of the Fingoes, of the
Zulus, and of every other tribe in South Africa, by our harsh and unjust
treatment of them.  The appointment of Sir Bartle Frere as Governor, and
of Mr. Sprigg and his party to power, are the greatest misfortunes which
have befallen this country for fifty years.”

The South African correspondent of the Daily News, writing from
Maritzburg, March 2, says:—“It is now only too evident to every one that
Sir Bartle Frere’s policy has been most mischievous in its effects upon
South African interests.  More has been done since he landed at Capetown,
two years ago, to produce discord and unsettlement than, it is to be
feared, can be undone for many years to come.  Friendly tribes have been
exasperated; colonists have been ridden over rough-shod, and now it would
seem that the High Commissioner is bent on bringing about the last and
final evil, by engaging in a war of conquest with the Transvaal Boers.

There is a strong and increasing feeling throughout South Africa that the
annexation of the Transvaal must be reversed.  When that act took place
it met with very wide approval, for two reasons—first, because it was
believed that the majority of the Boers were consenting parties; and
next, because it was believed that the act might tend to bring the two
great European nationalities closer together.  The return of the second
Transvaal deputation has brought to light the fact that the majority of
the Boers were by no means consenting parties.  They complain, too, and
justly, that not one of the promises made at the time of the annexation
has been fulfilled.  If the acts of the annexation were repealed, and
time allowed for the bitter feelings engendered by it to subside, there
is little doubt that the Boers would be found willing to come into some
sort of confederation with the other South African States, and there can
be no doubt that if the Transvaal came in willingly the Free State, whose
capital, Bloemfontein, is regarded by many as the natural capital of
South Africa, would come in also.”

What is to be the end of our system of annexation in South Africa?  Our
Consuls far away from the healthy criticism of the English Press, and
possibly better trained in ancient than modern history, dream imperial
dreams, and the public at home applauds when a magnificent success crowns
their work.  In the case of Sir Bartle Frere there has been a failure,
and he will have to pay the penalty; while demagogues who, like the
Irishman who when landed in America, and asked for his vote for the
opposition candidate, immediately promised it, remarking he was “again
all Government,” see in the failure the hand of Earl Beaconsfield, and
hold him up to scorn and contempt.  It is clear what has been done at the
Cape is only in accordance with the whole past of colonial rule, not
merely there, but in every quarter of the globe.  We could not leave the
Boers alone, who stood as buffers between us and the surrounding savages.

We must follow them over desert and plain and swamp and river and rock
and bush.  The colonist reaped, at any rate, a benefit from such a
policy, for he made profitable contracts for his waggons and horses, and
there was a refreshing stream of English gold, which otherwise would have
been dried up.  The Book of Nature might say, Leave the Boers and the
savages alone; but to a highly-cultured people the Book of Nature is a
blank, and the passions and prejudices, and fears and hopes, of the
passing hour are the only considerations by which the public and the
puppets it places in office are moved.  Some of us still talk of the New
Testament; but he who were to quote it, even after Mr. Speaker had said
the prayers, in our High Court of Parliament, as bearing in any way on
national policy, would be as much laughed at as Dr. Kenealy or Major
O’Gorman.  Meanwhile time will solve the problem—the storm will blow
over.  The mob and the pictorial papers will glorify the returning heroes
who have crushed a savage who was mad enough to defy on his own behalf
and on that of his people the British power, and the British public will
have to pay the bill—not, unfortunately, the hard-working, over-taxed
working man; he is a myth, as much so as a mermaid or a griffin; but that
large middle-class, on whom the tax-gatherer instinctively preys; who
have been shorn so often that it has become to them a second nature; who
have been the mainstay of the country, but who are fast becoming, under
the weight of Imperial taxation for Imperial schemes, an extinct race.


CHAPTER: THE STUDENT


Yes, the sun of the Grand Monarque was setting. Louis Quatorze was
nearing the end of his long lease of splendour. Our little François
was not a month old when Admiral Rooke whipped Château-Renaud off the
high seas, destroying the French and Spanish fleets in Vigo Bay, and
carrying off some millions of pieces of eight from the galleons as
treasure. The child's first year saw the English troopers ride down
the French at Blenheim--a day that made "Malbrook" a name of dread to
every French child, a name to frighten into good behaviour. To the
little fellow's home came the horror-spoken talk of Ramilies; then of
Oudenarde; then of Lille--to his six-year-old ears the terrible news
of Malplaquet.

But there was Paris a-bellringing in his ears at seven; for there was
born to the king's grandson a sickly child that was to succeed him as
Louis the Fifteenth. And François Boucher is one day to step from his
modest home and stand nearer at this child's side than he thinks.

The boy Boucher, at sturdy twelve, would recall the death of the old
king in his lonely last years, and the setting upon the ancient throne
of France of the five-year-old child as Louis Quinze--a comely little
fellow--with Orleans as Regent. Young François Boucher was to spend
his youth and grow up to manhood in a France that lay under the
regency of this dissolute, brilliant Orleans.

Nicolas Boucher, the father, seems to have been an obscure, honest
fellow, given to the trade of art, and that too in mediocre fashion
enough, designing embroideries, covers for chairs, and the like--"an
inferior designer, little favoured by fortune," runs the recorded
verdict of his day. But he had the virtue of recognising his
mediocrity, and the desire to save his son from the sordid cares of
mediocre artistry; since, having himself given the boy his schooling
with pencil and brush, and brought the lad up in an atmosphere of art
and in the company of artists, he had the astuteness to send him to
the studio of Lemoyne, a really great painter and rapidly becoming
famous--he who painted the ceilings of Versailles with gods and
goddesses in handsome fashion.

Lemoyne was a well-chosen master for the promising youth of seventeen.

He had founded his art upon that of Correggio and Veronese, had rid
himself of hard academic tendencies, and was painting in a sound
French fashion. The youth Boucher, with the quick and astounding gift,
that he displayed all through his life, of rapidly making his own what
he wanted to acquire, picked up from Lemoyne at once a French way of
stating what he desired to state, in a large, broad manner, without
having to go through the long years of drudgery to Italian models of
style which was then the only schooling for an artist--was therefore
enabled to free himself from the equally long years that it would have
taken him to rid the Italian style from his artistry. In short, the
youth of seventeen made Lemoyne's art his own in a few weeks; and, on
the eve of manhood, he so rivalled his master in accomplishment that
it is dangerous to attribute a picture of this time to the master or
the pupil without most careful evidence.

Yet the youth vowed that he was but three months with Lemoyne, who,
said he, took scant interest in his pupils. But it must be remembered
that Boucher was a prodigious worker, with a passionate love for his
work that lasted until death took the brush from his fingers, and that
he had a quick and alert mind and hand, free from the hesitances of a
student, and always daring in experiment. To wish to achieve a thing,
for Boucher, was to set him to its achievement. He rested neither
night nor day until he mastered that which he had set out to do. On
the day he left Lemoyne's studio he stepped out of it a finished
artist, a sound painter, fully equipped with all the craftmanship,
trade-secrets, and tricks of thumb that it had taken his master his
life to learn--and a facile copyist of his style and handling. It was
the sincerest form of flattery; and Boucher, to the end of his days,
held the art of Lemoyne in the greatest reverence--as is proved by his
answer, when at the very height of his fame, to one who asked him to
complete a picture by his master: "Such works are to me sacred
vessels," said he--"I should dread to profane them by touching them."

Lemoyne's admiration for his pupil was not lacking in return. The
youth painted, whilst with his master, a picture of a "Judgment of
Susanna," before which Lemoyne stood astounded, then burst into
prophecy of Boucher achieving greatness in the years to come.

From Lemoyne's studio, the young fellow went to live with "Père Cars,"
the engraver, whose son, Laurent, was a friend of the youth, and who
engaged him to design the drawings for his engravers, allowing him in
return his food, lodging, and sixty livres (double-florins) a
month--some twelve pounds. Boucher accounted his fortune made.

The cheery youth went at his work with energy and enthusiasm, blithely
setting his hand to anything that was wanted of him, bringing charm
and invention to all he did--tailpieces, frontispieces, emblems, coats
of arms, freemason's certificates, first-communion cards, initial
letters. He was soon set to work upon important designs for
engravings. He searched out the publishers of books, and let no
chance escape of working for them.

Thus and otherwise he filled his scanty purse--that needed filling,
for he was quick at its emptying, being of a free hand and generous
disposition. And hard as he worked, so did he play. Work and pleasure
were his joy in life.

And all the time he was taking part in the students' competitions for
the Academy.

It was in his nineteenth year that, in this same Paris, in the house
of one of its rich families, was born a little girl-child who was to
come into Boucher's life in after years. The father, a financial
fellow, one Poisson, was a man of shady repute; indeed he was under
banishment for mis-handling the public moneys at the time of the
birth of the little girl-child, christened Jeanne Antoinette
Poisson--destined to be the Jane of the scurrilous street songs of the
years to come. But the careless student knew little of it as yet, nor
that destiny had put into the pretty child's cradle the sceptre and
diadem of France as plaything.

Boucher, on the eve of manhood, took as little heed of the child's
coming as did the thirteen-year-old lad who sat upon the throne, and
who, in little Jane Poisson's first year, was declared to be of man's
estate and ruler of France, no longer requiring Regent Orleans to
govern for him.

It was in this his nineteenth year that Boucher took the first prize
at the Academy with his picture of "Evilmerodach, son and successor of
Nebuchadnezzar, delivering Joachin from chains, in which his father
had for a long time held him."

This success set the collectors buying pictures by the brilliant
youngster. But François Boucher needs no paying orders to make him
work--he paints for the love of the thing, declares that his "studio
is his church," and seeks to display his art and spread the repute of
it abroad. And his fame grows apace, if at a cost. Nay, he courts fame
even to the extent of hanging his pictures upon the tapestries and
carpets and such like draperies that the police oblige the citizens to
hang out from their houses along the Place Dauphin and the Pont-Neuf
during the procession of the Fête-Dieu--called the Exposition de la
Jeunesse.

There was a thing happened about this time that was to be of large
significance to the young fellow's craftsmanship. Watteau had lately
died, his eager will burning out the poor stricken body. His friend De
Julienne, anxious to publish a book to Watteau's memory, strolled into
the engraving-studio behind "Père Cars'" shop, where Boucher and his
comrade, Laurent Cars, were wont to spend a part of their time; and he
commissioned Boucher to engrave 125 of the plates after the dead
master. Watteau's essentially French influence was the impulse above
all others to thrust forward the development of Boucher's genius along
its right path, and sent his art towards its great goal. The business
was a rare delight to the young artist, and in the doing of it he
learnt many lessons which added greatly to the enhancement of his
style; whilst the payment of twenty-four livres (double-florins) a day
still further increased his delight and contentment.

He completed the series with his wonted fiery zeal and rapid facility,
and thus and otherwise, hotly pursuing his study of nature and his
art, he arrived at the moment when his education should receive its
inevitable finishing state in the Italian tour; so to Rome he went
with Carle Van Loo and his two nephews, François and Louis Van Loo.

Of Boucher's wander-years in Italy little is known. He seems to have
shown scant respect for the accepted standards of the schools and the
critics, to have found Michael Angelo "contorted," Raphael "insipid,"
and Carrache "gloomy." He, in fact, was drawn only to such artists as
were to his taste, and he had the courage to say so. However, whether
he were kept idle from ill-health or not; whether his stay were short
or not, he appears again in Paris in three years--suspiciously like
the three years' conventional Italian study of a first-prize winner of
the Academy--with a large number of religious pictures to his
credit--pictures that were hailed by the Academicians and critics
alike for their beauty, their force, and their virility--pictures
which, perhaps fortunately for Boucher's repute, have vanished, or
hang in galleries under other names.

Here we see Boucher grimly putting aside his own taste and aims in
art, and doggedly bending his will and hand to a prodigious effort to
win the reputation and standing of a "serious painter," without which
he could not hope to attain academic honours. He won them; for, in
this his twenty-eighth year, on his return to Paris, he was
"nominated" to the Academy. He had but to present an Historical
Painting in order to take his seat as an Academician.


CHAPTER: THE STORY


DRAMATIS PERSONÆ


FOR the discovery of Dickens’s secret in _Edwin Drood_ it is necessary to
obtain a clear view of the characters in the tale, and of their relations
to each other.

About the middle of the nineteenth century there lived in Cloisterham, a
cathedral city sketched from Rochester, a young University man, Mr. Bud,
who had a friend Mr. Drood, one of a firm of engineers—somewhere.  They
were “fast friends and old college companions.”  Both married young.  Mr.
Bud wedded a lady unnamed, by whom he was the father of one child, a
daughter, Rosa Bud.  Mr. Drood, whose wife’s maiden name was Jasper, had
one son, Edwin Drood.  Mrs. Bud was drowned in a boating accident, when
her daughter, Rosa, was a child.  Mr. Drood, already a widower, and the
bereaved Mr. Bud “betrothed” the two children, Rosa and Edwin, and then
expired, when the orphans were about seven and eleven years old.  The
guardian of Rosa was a lawyer, Mr. Grewgious, who had been in love with
her mother.  To Grewgious Mr. Bud entrusted his wife’s engagement ring,
rubies and diamonds, which Grewgious was to hand over to Edwin Drood, if,
when he attained his majority, he and Rosa decided to marry.

Grewgious was apparently legal agent for Edwin, while Edwin’s maternal
uncle, John Jasper (aged about sixteen when the male parents died), was
Edwin’s “trustee,” as well as his uncle and devoted friend.  Rosa’s
little fortune was an annuity producing £250 a-year: Edwin succeeded to
his father’s share in an engineering firm.

When the story opens, Edwin is nearly twenty-one, and is about to proceed
to Egypt, as an engineer.  Rosa, at school in Cloisterham, is about
seventeen; John Jasper is twenty-six.  He is conductor of the Choir of
the Cathedral, a “lay precentor;” he is very dark, with thick black
whiskers, and, for a number of years, has been a victim to the habit of
opium smoking.  He began very early.  He takes this drug both in his
lodgings, over the gate of the Cathedral, and in a den in East London,
kept by a woman nicknamed “The Princess Puffer.”  This hag, we learn, has
been a determined drunkard,—“I drank heaven’s-hard,”—for sixteen years
_before_ she took to opium.  If she has been dealing in opium for ten
years (the exact period is not stated), she has been very disreputable
for twenty-six years, that is ever since John Jasper’s birth.  Mr. Cuming
Walters suggests that she is the mother of John Jasper, and, therefore,
maternal grandmother of Edwin Drood.  She detests her client, Jasper, and
plays the spy on his movements, for reasons unexplained.

Jasper is secretly in love with Rosa, the _fiancée_ of his nephew, and
his own pupil in the musical art.  He makes her aware of his passion,
silently, and she fears and detests him, but keeps these emotions
private.  She is a saucy school-girl, and she and Edwin are on
uncomfortable terms: she does not love him, while he perhaps does love
her, but is annoyed by her manner, and by the gossip about their
betrothal.  “The bloom is off the plum” of their prearranged loves, he
says to his friend, uncle, and confidant, Jasper, whose own concealed
passion for Rosa is of a ferocious and homicidal character.  Rosa is
aware of this fact; “a glaze comes over his eyes,” sometimes, she says,
“and he seems to wander away into a frightful sort of dream, in which he
threatens most . . . ”  The man appears to have these frightful dreams
even when he is not under opium.


OPENING OF THE TALE


The tale opens abruptly with an opium-bred vision of the tower of
Cloisterham Cathedral, beheld by Jasper as he awakens in the den of the
Princess Puffer, between a Chinaman, a Lascar, and the hag herself.  This
Cathedral tower, thus early and emphatically introduced, is to play a
great but more or less mysterious part in the romance: that is certain.
Jasper, waking, makes experiments on the talk of the old woman, the
Lascar and Chinaman in their sleep.  He pronounces it “unintelligible,”
which satisfies him that his own babble, when under opium, must be
unintelligible also.  He is, presumably, acquainted with the languages of
the eastern coast of India, and with Chinese, otherwise, how could he
hope to understand the sleepers?  He is being watched by the hag, who
hates him.

Jasper returns to Cloisterham, where we are introduced to the Dean, a
nonentity, and to Minor Canon Crisparkle, a muscular Christian in the
pink of training, a classical scholar, and a good honest fellow.  Jasper
gives Edwin a dinner, and gushes over “his bright boy,” a lively lad,
full of chaff, but also full of confiding affection and tenderness of
heart.  Edwin admits that his betrothal is a bore: Jasper admits that he
loathes his life; and that the church singing “often sounds to me quite
devilish,”—and no wonder.  After this dinner, Jasper has a “weird
seizure;” “a strange film comes over Jasper’s eyes,” he “looks
frightfully ill,” becomes rigid, and admits that he “has been taking
opium for a pain, an agony that sometimes overcomes me.”  This “agony,”
we learn, is the pain of hearing Edwin speak lightly of his love, whom
Jasper so furiously desires.  “Take it as a warning,” Jasper says, but
Edwin, puzzled, and full of confiding tenderness, does not understand.

In the next scene we meet the school-girl, Rosa, who takes a walk and has
a tiff with Edwin.  Sir Luke Fildes’s illustration shows Edwin as “a lad
with the bloom of a lass,” with a _classic profile_; _and a gracious head
of long_, _thick_, _fair hair_, long, though we learn it has just been
cut.  He wears a soft slouched hat, and the pea-coat of the period.


SAPSEA AND DURDLES


Next, Jasper and Sapsea, a pompous ass, auctioneer, and mayor, sit at
their wine, expecting a third guest.  Mr. Sapsea reads his absurd epitaph
for his late wife, who is buried in a “Monument,” a vault of some sort in
the Cathedral churchyard.  To them enter Durdles, a man never sober, yet
trusted with the key of the crypt, “as contractor for rough repairs.”  In
the crypt “he habitually sleeps off the fumes of liquor.”  Of course no
Dean would entrust keys to this incredibly dissipated, dirty, and
insolent creature, to whom Sapsea gives the key of his vault, for no
reason at all, as the epitaph, of course, is to be engraved on the
outside, by Durdles’s men.  However, Durdles insists on getting the key
of the vault: he has two other large keys.  Jasper, trifling with them,
keeps clinking them together, so as to know, even in the dark, by the
sound, which is the key that opens Sapsea’s vault, in the railed-off
burial ground, beside the cloister arches.  He has met Durdles at
Sapsea’s for no other purpose than to obtain access at will to Mrs.
Sapsea’s monument.  Later in the evening Jasper finds Durdles more or
less drunk, and being stoned by a _gamin_, “Deputy,” a retainer of a
tramp’s lodging-house.  Durdles fees Deputy, in fact, to drive him home
every night after ten.  Jasper and Deputy fall into feud, and Jasper has
thus a new, keen, and omnipresent enemy.  As he walks with Durdles that
worthy explains (in reply to a question by Jasper), that, by tapping a
wall, even if over six feet thick, with his hammer, he can detect the
nature of the contents of the vault, “solid in hollow, and inside solid,
hollow again.  Old ’un crumbled away in stone coffin, in vault.”  He can
also discover the presence of “rubbish left in that same six foot space
by Durdles’s men.”  Thus, if a foreign body were introduced into the
Sapsea vault, Durdles could detect its presence by tapping the outside
wall.  As Jasper’s purpose clearly is to introduce a foreign body—that of
Edwin who stands between him and Rosa—into Mrs. Sapsea’s vault, this
“gift” of Durdles is, for Jasper, an uncomfortable discovery.  He goes
home, watches Edwin asleep, and smokes opium.


THE LANDLESSES


Two new characters are now introduced, Neville and Helena Landless,
twins, orphans, of Cingalese extraction, probably Eurasian; very dark,
the girl “almost of the gipsy type;” both are “fierce of look.”  The
young man is to read with Canon Crisparkle and live with him; the girl
goes to the same school as Rosa.  The education of both has been utterly
neglected; instruction has been denied to them.  Neville explains the
cause of their fierceness to Crisparkle.  In Ceylon they were bullied by
a cruel stepfather and several times ran away: the girl was the leader,
always “_dressed as a boy_, _and showing the daring of a man_.”  Edwin
Drood’s air of supercilious ownership of Rosa Bud (indicated as a fault
of youth and circumstance, not of heart and character), irritates Neville
Landless, who falls in love with Rosa at first sight.  As Rosa sings, at
Crisparkle’s, while Jasper plays the piano, Jasper’s fixed stare produces
an hysterical fit in the girl, who is soothed by Helena Landless.  Helena
shows her aversion to Jasper, who, as even Edwin now sees, frightens
Rosa.  “You would be afraid of him, under similar circumstances, wouldn’t
you, Miss Landless?” asks Edwin.  “Not under any circumstances,” answers
Helena, and Jasper “thanks Miss Landless for this vindication of his
character.”

The girls go back to their school, where Rosa explains to Helena her
horror of Jasper’s silent love-making: “I feel that I am never safe from
him . . . a glaze comes over his eyes and he seems to wander away into a
frightful sort of dream in which he threatens most,” as already quoted.
Helena thus, and she alone, except Rosa, understands Jasper thoroughly.
She becomes Rosa’s protectress.  “_Let whomsoever it most concerned look
well to it_.”

Thus Jasper has a new observer and enemy, in addition to the omnipresent
street boy, Deputy, and the detective old hag of the opium den.

Leaving the Canon’s house, Neville and Edwin quarrel violently over Rosa,
in the open air; they are followed by Jasper, and taken to his house to
be reconciled over glasses of mulled wine.  Jasper drugs the wine, and
thus provokes a violent scene; next day he tells Crisparkle that Neville
is “murderous.”  “There is something of the tiger in his dark blood.”  He
spreads the story of the _fracas_ in the town.


MR. GREWGIOUS


Grewgious, Rosa’s guardian, now comes down on business; the girl fails to
explain to him the unsatisfactory relations between her and Edwin:
Grewgious is to return to her “at Christmas,” if she sends for him, and
she does send.  Grewgious, “an angular man,” all duty and sentiment (he
had loved Rosa’s mother), has an interview with Edwin’s trustee, Jasper,
for whom he has no enthusiasm, but whom he does not in any way suspect.
They part on good terms, to meet at Christmas.  Crisparkle, with whom
Helena has fallen suddenly in love, arranges with Jasper that Edwin and
Landless shall meet and be reconciled, as both are willing to be, at a
dinner in Jasper’s rooms, on Christmas Eve.  Jasper, when Crisparkle
proposes this, denotes by his manner “some close internal calculation.”
We see that he is reckoning how the dinner suits his plan of campaign,
and “_close_ calculation” may refer, as in Mr. Proctor’s theory, to the
period of the moon: _on Christmas Eve there will be no moonshine at
midnight_.  Jasper, having worked out this problem, accepts Crisparkle’s
proposal, and his assurances about Neville, and shows Crisparkle a diary
in which he has entered his fears that Edwin’s life is in danger from
Neville.  Edwin (who is not in Cloisterham at this moment) accepts, by
letter, the invitation to meet Neville at Jasper’s on Christmas Eve.

Meanwhile Edwin visits Grewgious in his London chambers; is lectured on
his laggard and supercilious behaviour as a lover, and receives the
engagement ring of the late Mrs. Bud, Rosa’s mother, which is very dear
to Grewgious—in the presence of Bazzard, Grewgious’s clerk, a gloomy
writer of an amateur unacted tragedy.  Edwin is to return the ring to
Grewgious, if he and Rosa decide not to marry.  The ring is in a case,
and Edwin places it “in his breast.”  We must understand, in the
breast-pocket of his coat: no other interpretation will pass muster.
“Her ring—will it come back to me?” reflects the mournful Grewgious.


THE UNACCOUNTABLE EXPEDITION


Jasper now tells Sapsea, and the Dean, that he is to make “a moonlight
expedition with Durdles among the tombs, vaults, towers, and ruins
to-night.”  The impossible Durdles has the keys necessary for this,
“surely an unaccountable expedition,” Dickens keeps remarking.  The moon
seems to rise on this night at about 7.30 p.m.  Jasper takes a big
case-bottle of liquor—drugged, of course and goes to the den of Durdles.
In the yard of this inspector of monuments he is bidden to beware of a
mound of quicklime near the yard gate.  “With a little handy stirring,
quick enough to eat your bones,” says Durdles.  There is some
considerable distance between this “mound” of quicklime and the crypt, of
which Durdles has the key, but the intervening space is quite empty of
human presence, as the citizens are unwilling to meet ghosts.

In the crypt Durdles drinks a good deal of the drugged liquor.  “They are
to ascend the great Tower,”—and why they do that is part of the Mystery,
though not an insoluble part.  Before they climb, Durdles tells Jasper
that he was drunk and asleep in the crypt, last Christmas Eve, and was
wakened by “the ghost of one terrific shriek, followed by the ghost of
the howl of a dog, a long dismal, woeful howl, such as a dog gives when a
person’s dead.”  Durdles has made inquiries and, as no one else heard the
shriek and the howl, he calls these sounds “ghosts.”

They are obviously meant to be understood as supranormal premonitory
sounds; of the nature of second sight, or rather of second hearing.
Forster gives examples of Dickens’s tendency to believe in such
premonitions: Dickens had himself a curious premonitory dream.  He
considerably overdid the premonitory business in his otherwise excellent
story, _The Signalman_, or so it seems to a student of these things.  The
shriek and howl heard by Durdles are to be repeated, we see, in real
life, later, on a Christmas Eve.  The question is—when?  More probably
_not_ on the Christmas Eve just imminent, when Edwin is to vanish, but,
on the Christmas Eve following, when Jasper is to be unmasked.

All this while, and later, Jasper examines Durdles very closely, studying
the effects on him of the drugged drink.  When they reach the top of the
tower, Jasper closely contemplates “that stillest part of it” (the
landscape) “which the Cathedral overshadows; but he contemplates Durdles
quite as curiously.”

There is a motive for the scrutiny in either case.  Jasper examines the
part of the precincts in the shadow of the Cathedral, because he wishes
to assure himself that it is lonely enough for his later undescribed but
easily guessed proceedings in this night of mystery.  He will have much
to do that could not brook witnesses, after the drugged Durdles has
fallen sound asleep.  We have already been assured that the whole area
over which Jasper is to operate is “utterly deserted,” even when it lies
in full moonlight, about 8.30 p.m.  “One might fancy that the tide of
life was stemmed by Mr. Jasper’s own gate-house.”  The people of
Cloisterham, we hear, would deny that they believe in ghosts; but they
give this part of the precinct a wide berth (Chapter XII.).  If the
region is “utterly deserted” at nine o’clock in the evening, when it lies
in the ivory moonlight, much more will it be free from human presence
when it lies in shadow, between one and two o’clock after midnight.
Jasper, however, from the tower top closely scrutinizes the area of his
future operations.  It is, probably, for this very purpose of discovering
whether the coast be clear or not, that Jasper climbs the tower.

He watches Durdles for the purpose of finding how the drug which he has
administered works, with a view to future operations on Edwin.  Durdles
is now in such a state that “he deems the ground so far below on a level
with the tower, and would as lief walk off the tower into the air as
not.”

All this is apparently meant to suggest that Jasper, on Christmas Eve,
will repeat his expedition, _with Edwin_, whom he will have drugged, and
that he will allow Edwin to “walk off the tower into the air.”  There are
later suggestions to the same effect, as we shall see, but they are
deliberately misleading.  There are also strong suggestions to the very
opposite effect: it is broadly indicated that Jasper is to strangle Edwin
with a thick black-silk scarf, which he has just taken to wearing for the
good of his throat.

The pair return to the crypt, Durdles falls asleep, dreams that Jasper
leaves him, “and that something touches him and something falls from his
hand.  Then something clinks and gropes about,” and the lines of
moonlight shift their direction, as Durdles finds that they have really
done when he wakens, with Jasper beside him, while the Cathedral clock
strikes two.  They have had many hours, not less than five, for their
expedition.  The key of the crypt lies beside Durdles on the ground.
They go out, and as Deputy begins stone-throwing, Jasper half strangles
him.


PURPOSE OF THE EXPEDITION


Jasper has had ample time to take models in wax of all Durdles’s keys.
But he could have done that in a few minutes, while Durdles slept, if he
had wax with him, without leaving the crypt.  He has also had time to
convey several wheelbarrowfuls of quicklime from Durdles’s yard to Mrs.
Sapsea’s sepulchre, of which monument he probably took the key from
Durdles, and tried its identity by clinking.  But even in a Cathedral
town, even after midnight, several successive expeditions of a lay
precentor with a wheelbarrow full of quicklime would have been apt to
attract the comment of some belated physician, some cleric coming from a
sick bed, or some local roysterers.  Therefore it is that Dickens insists
on the “utterly deserted” character of the area, and shows us that Jasper
has made sure of that essential fact by observations from the tower top.
Still, his was a perilous expedition, with his wheelbarrow!  We should
probably learn later, that Jasper was detected by the wakeful Deputy, who
loathed him.  Moreover, next morning Durdles was apt to notice that some
of his quicklime had been removed.  As far as is shown, Durdles noticed
nothing of that kind, though he does observe peculiarities in Jasper’s
behaviour.

The next point in the tale is that Edwin and Rosa meet, and have sense
enough to break off their engagement.  But Edwin, represented as really
good-hearted, now begins to repent his past behaviour, and, though he has
a kind of fancy for Miss Landless, he pretty clearly falls deeper in love
with his late _fiancée_, and weeps his loss in private: so we are told.


CHRISTMAS EVE


Christmas Eve comes, the day of the dinner of three, Jasper, Landless,
and Edwin.  The chapter describing this fateful day (xiv.) is headed,
_When shall these Three meet again_? and Mr. Proctor argues that Dickens
intends that _they shall_ meet again.  The intention, and the hint, are
much in Dickens’s manner.  Landless means to start, next day, very early,
on a solitary walking tour, and buys an exorbitantly heavy stick.  We
casually hear that Jasper knows Edwin to possess no jewellery, except a
watch and chain and a scarf-pin.  As Edwin moons about, he finds the old
opium hag, come down from London, “seeking a needle in a bottle of hay,”
she says—that is, hunting vainly for Jasper.

Please remark that Jasper has run up to town, on December 23, and has
saturated his system with a debauch of opium on the very eve of the day
when he clearly means to kill Edwin.  This was a most injudicious
indulgence, in the circumstances.  A maiden murder needs nerve!  We know
that “fiddlestrings was weakness to express the state of” Jasper’s
“nerves” on the day after the night of opium with which the story opens.
On December 24, Jasper returned home, the hag at his heels.  The old
woman, when met by Edwin, has a curious film over her eyes; “he seems to
know her.”  “Great heaven,” he thinks, next moment.  “Like Jack that
night!”  This refers to a kind of fit of Jasper’s, after dinner, on the
first evening of the story.  Edwin has then seen Jack Jasper in one of
his “filmy” seizures.  The woman prays Edwin for three shillings and
sixpence, to buy opium.  He gives her the money; she asks his Christian
name.  “Edwin.”  Is “Eddy” a sweetheart’s form of that?  He says that he
has no sweetheart.  He is told to be thankful that his name is not Ned.
Now, Jasper alone calls Edwin “Ned.”  “‘Ned’ is a threatened name, a
dangerous name,” says the hag, who has heard Jasper threaten “Ned” in his
opium dreams.

Edwin determines to tell this adventure to Jasper, _but not on this
night_: to-morrow will do.  Now, _did_ he tell the story to Jasper that
night, in the presence of Landless, at dinner?  If so, Helena Landless
might later learn the fact from Neville.  If she knew it, she would later
tell Mr. Grewgious.

The three men meet and dine.  There is a fearful storm.  “Stones are
displaced upon the summit of the great tower.”  Next morning, early,
Jasper yells to Crisparkle, who is looking out of his window in Minor
Canon Row, that Edwin has disappeared.  Neville has already set out on
his walking tour.


AFTER THE DISAPPEARANCE


Men go forth and apprehend Neville, who shows fight with his heavy stick.
We learn that he and Drood left Jasper’s house at midnight, went for ten
minutes to look at the river under the wind, and parted at Crisparkle’s
door.  Neville now remains under suspicion: Jasper directs the search in
the river, on December 25, 26, and 27.  On the evening of December 27,
Grewgious visits Jasper.  Now, Grewgious, as we know, was to be at
Cloisterham at Christmas.  True, he was engaged to dine on Christmas Day
with Bazzard, his clerk; but, thoughtful as he was of the moody Bazzard,
as Edwin was leaving Cloisterham he would excuse himself.  He would
naturally take a great part in the search for Edwin, above all as Edwin
had in his possession the ring so dear to the lawyer.  Edwin had not
shown it to Rosa when they determined to part.  He “kept it in his
breast,” and the ring, we learn, was “_gifted with invincible force to
hold and drag_,” so Dickens warns us.

The ring is obviously to be a _pièce de conviction_.  But our point, at
present, is that we do not know how Grewgious, to whom this ring was so
dear, employed himself at Cloisterham—after Edwin’s disappearance—between
December 25 and December 27.  On the evening of the 27th, he came to
Jasper, saying, “I have _just left Miss Landless_.”  He then slowly and
watchfully told Jasper that Edwin’s engagement was broken off, while the
precentor gasped, perspired, tore his hair, shrieked, and finally
subsided into a heap of muddy clothes on the floor.  Meanwhile, Mr.
Grewgious, calmly observing these phenomena, warmed his hands at the fire
for some time before he called in Jasper’s landlady.

Grewgious now knows by Jasper’s behaviour that he believes himself to
have committed a superfluous crime, by murdering Edwin, who no longer
stood between him and Rosa, as their engagement was already at an end.
Whether a Jasper, in real life, would excite himself so much, is another
question.  We do not know, as Mr. Proctor insists, what Mr. Grewgious had
been doing at Cloisterham between Christmas Day and December 27, the date
of his experiment on Jasper’s nerves.  Mr. Proctor supposes him to have
met the living Edwin, and obtained information from him, after his escape
from a murderous attack by Jasper.  Mr. Proctor insists that this is the
only explanation of Grewgious’s conduct, any other “is absolutely
impossible.”  In that case the experiment of Grewgious was not made to
gain information from Jasper’s demeanour, but was the beginning of his
punishment, and was intended by Grewgious to be so.

But Dickens has been careful to suggest, with suspicious breadth of
candour, another explanation of the source of Grewgious’s knowledge.  If
Edwin has really escaped, and met Grewgious, Dickens does not want us to
be sure of that, as Mr. Proctor was sure.  Dickens deliberately puts his
readers on another trail, though neither Mr. Walters nor Mr. Proctor
struck the scent.  As we have noted, Grewgious at once says to Jasper,
“_I have just come from Miss Landless_.”  This tells Jasper nothing, but
it tells a great deal to the watchful reader, who remembers that Miss
Landless, and she only, is aware that Jasper loves, bullies, and insults
Rosa, and that Rosa’s life is embittered by Jasper’s silent wooing, and
his unspoken threats.  Helena may also know that “Ned is a threatened
name,” as we have seen, and that the menace comes from Jasper.  As Jasper
is now known to be Edwin’s rival in love, and as Edwin has vanished, the
murderer, Mr. Grewgious reckons, is Jasper; and his experiment, with
Jasper’s consequent shriek and fit, confirms the hypothesis.  Thus
Grewgious had information enough, from Miss Landless, to suggest his
experiment—Dickens intentionally made that clear (though not clear enough
for Mr. Proctor and Mr. Cuming Walters)—while his experiment gives him a
moral certainty of Jasper’s crime, but yields no legal evidence.

But does Grewgious know no more than what Helena, and the fit and shriek
of Jasper, have told him?  Is his knowledge limited to the evidence that
Jasper has murdered Edwin?  Or does Grewgious know more, know that Edwin,
in some way, has escaped from death?

That is Dickens’s secret.  But whereas Grewgious, if he believes Jasper
to be an actual murderer, should take him seriously; in point of fact, he
speaks of Jasper in so light a tone, as “our local friend,” that we feel
no certainty that he is not really aware of Edwin’s escape from a
murderous attack by Jasper, and of his continued existence.

Presently Crisparkle, under some mysterious impression, apparently
telepathic (the book is rich in such psychical phenomena), visits the
weir on the river, at night, and next day finds Edwin’s watch and chain
in the timbers; his scarf-pin in the pool below.  The watch and chain
must have been placed purposely where they were found, they could not
float thither, and, if Neville had slain Edwin, he would not have stolen
his property, of course, except as a blind, neutralised by the placing of
the watch in a conspicuous spot.  However, the increased suspicions drive
Neville away to read law in Staple Inn, where Grewgious also dwells, and
incessantly watches Neville out of his window.

About six months later, Helena Landless is to join Neville, who is
watched at intervals by Jasper, who, again, is watched by Grewgious as
the precentor lurks about Staple Inn.


DICK DATCHERY


About the time when Helena leaves Cloisterham for town, a new character
appears in Cloisterham, “a white-headed personage with black eyebrows,
_buttoned up in a tightish blue surtout_, with a buff waistcoat, grey
trowsers, and something of a military air.”  His shock of white hair was
unusually thick and ample.  This man, “a buffer living idly on his
means,” named Datchery, is either, as Mr. Proctor believed, Edwin Drood,
or, as Mr. Walters thinks, Helena Landless.  By making Grewgious drop the
remark that Bazzard, his clerk, a moping owl of an amateur tragedian, “is
off duty here,” at his chambers, Dickens hints that Bazzard is Datchery.
But that is a mere false scent, a ruse of the author, scattering paper in
the wrong place, in this long paper hunt.

As for Helena, Mr. Walters justly argues that Dickens has marked her for
some important part in the ruin of Jasper.  “There was a slumbering gleam
of fire in her intense dark eyes.  Let whomsoever it most concerned look
well to it.”  Again, we have been told that Helena had high courage.  She
had told Jasper that she feared him “in no circumstances whatever.”
Again, we have learned that in childhood she had dressed as a boy when
she ran away from home; and she had the motives of protecting Rosa and
her brother, Neville, from the machinations of Jasper, who needs
watching, as he is trying to ruin Neville’s already dilapidated
character, and, by spying on him, to break down his nerve.  Really, of
course, Neville is quite safe.  There is no _corpus delicti_, no carcase
of the missing Edwin Drood.

For the reasons given, Datchery might be Helena in disguise.

If so, the idea is highly ludicrous, while nothing is proved either by
the blackness of Datchery’s eyebrows (Helena’s were black), or by
Datchery’s habit of carrying his hat under his arm, not on his head.  A
person who goes so far as to wear a conspicuous white wig, would not be
afraid also to dye his eyebrows black, if he were Edwin; while either
Edwin or Helena _must_ have “made up” the face, by the use of paint and
sham wrinkles.  Either Helena or Edwin would have been detected in real
life, of course, but we allow for the accepted fictitious convention of
successful disguise, and for the necessities of the novelist.  A tightly
buttoned surtout would show Helena’s feminine figure; but let that also
pass.  As to the hat, Edwin’s own hair was long and thick: add a wig, and
his hat would be a burden to him.

What is most unlike the stern, fierce, sententious Helena, is Datchery’s
habit of “chaffing.”  He fools the ass of a Mayor, Sapsea, by most
exaggerated diference: his tone is always that of indolent mockery, which
one doubts whether the “intense” and concentrated Helena could assume.
He takes rooms in the same house as Jasper, to whom, as to Durdles and
Deputy, he introduces himself on the night of his arrival at Cloisterham.
He afterwards addresses Deputy, the little _gamin_, by the name “Winks,”
which is given to him by the people at the Tramps’ lodgings: the name is
a secret of Deputy’s.


JASPER, ROSA, AND TARTAR


Meanwhile Jasper formally proposes to Rosa, in the school garden:
standing apart and leaning against a sundial, as the garden is commanded
by many windows.  He offers to resign his hopes of bringing Landless to
the gallows (perhaps this bad man would provide a _corpus delicti_ of his
own making!) if Rosa will accept him: he threatens to “pursue her to the
death,” if she will not; he frightens her so thoroughly that she rushes
to Grewgious in his chambers in London.  She now suspects Jasper of
Edwin’s murder, but keeps her thoughts to herself.  She tells Grewgious,
who is watching Neville,—“I have a fancy for keeping him under my
eye,”—that Jasper has made love to her, and Grewgious replies in a parody
of “God save the King”!

    “On Thee his hopes to fix
       Damn him again!”

Would he fool thus, if he knew Jasper to have killed Edwin?  He is not
certain whether Rosa should visit Helena next day, in Landless’s rooms,
opposite; and Mr. Walters suggests that he may be aware that Helena,
dressed as Datchery, is really absent at Cloisterham.  However, next day,
Helena is in her brother’s rooms.  Moreover, it is really a sufficient
explanation of Grewgious’s doubt that Jasper is lurking around, and that
not till next day is a _private_ way of communication arranged between
Neville and his friends.  In any case, next day, Helena is in her
brother’s rooms, and, by aid of a Mr. Tartar’s rooms, she and Rosa can
meet privately.  There is a good deal of conspiring to watch Jasper when
he watches Neville, and in this new friend, Mr. Tartar, a lover is
provided for Rosa.  Tartar is a miraculously agile climber over roofs and
up walls, a retired Lieutenant of the navy, and a handy man, being such a
climber, to chase Jasper about the roof of the Cathedral, when Jasper’s
day of doom arrives.


JASPER’S OPIUM VISIONS


In July, Jasper revisits the London opium den, and talks under opium,
watched by the old hag.  He speaks of a thing which he often does in
visions: “a hazardous and perilous journey, over abysses where a slip
would be destruction.  Look down, look down!  You see what lies at the
bottom there?”  He enacts the vision and says, “There was a fellow
traveller.”  He “speaks in a whisper, and as if in the dark.”  The vision
is, in this case, “a poor vision: no struggle, no consciousness of peril,
no entreaty.”  Edwin, in the reminiscent vision, dies very easily and
rapidly.  “When it comes to be real at last, it is so short that it seems
unreal for the first time.”  “And yet I never saw _that_ before.  Look
what a poor miserable mean thing it is.  _That_ must be real.  It’s
over.”

What can all this mean?  We have been told that, shortly before Christmas
Eve, Jasper took to wearing a thick black-silk handkerchief for his
throat.  He hung it over his arm, “his face knitted and stern,” as he
entered his house for his Christmas Eve dinner.  If he strangled Edwin
with the scarf, as we are to suppose, he did not lead him, drugged, to
the tower top, and pitch him off.  Is part of Jasper’s vision
reminiscent—the brief, unresisting death—while another part is a separate
vision, is _prospective_, “premonitory”?  Does he see himself pitching
Neville Landless off the tower top, or see him fallen from the Cathedral
roof?  Is Neville’s body “_that_”—“I never saw _that_ before.  Look what
a poor miserable mean thing it is!  _That_ must be real.”  Jasper “never
saw _that_”—the dead body below the height—before.  _This_ vision, I
think, is of the future, not of the past, and is meant to bewilder the
reader who thinks that the whole represents the slaying of Drood.  The
tale is rich in “warnings” and telepathy.


DATCHERY AND THE OPIUM WOMAN


The hag now tracks Jasper home to Cloisterham.  Here she meets Datchery,
whom she asks how she can see Jasper?  If Datchery is Drood, he now
learns, _what he did not know before_, _that there is some connection
between Jasper and the hag_.  He walks with her to the place where Edwin
met the hag, on Christmas Eve, and gave her money; and he jingles his own
money as he walks.  The place, or the sound of the money, makes the woman
tell Datchery about Edwin’s gift of three shillings and sixpence for
opium.  Datchery, “with a sudden change of countenance, gives her a
sudden look.”  It does not follow that he is _not_ Drood, for, though the
hag’s love of opium was known to Drood, Datchery is not to reveal his
recognition of the woman.  He does what any stranger would do; he “gives
a sudden look,” as if surprised by the mention of opium.

Mr. Walters says, “Drood would not have changed countenance on hearing a
fact he had known six months previously.”  But if Drood was playing at
being somebody else, he would, of course, give a kind of start and stare,
on hearing of the opium.  When he also hears from the hag that her former
benefactor’s name was Edwin, he asks her how she knew that—“a fatuously
unnecessary question,” says Mr. Walters.  A needless question for
Datchery’s information, if he be Drood, but as useful a question as
another if Drood be Datchery, and wishes to maintain the conversation.


DATCHERY’S SCORE


Datchery keeps a tavern score of his discoveries behind a door, in
cryptic chalk strokes.  He does this, says Mr. Walters, because, being
Helena, he would betray himself if he wrote in a female hand.  But nobody
would _write_ secrets on a door!  He adds “a moderate stroke,” after
meeting the hag, though, says Mr. Walters, “Edwin Drood would have
learned nothing new whatever” from the hag.

But Edwin would have learned something quite new, and very important—that
the hag was hunting Jasper.  Next day Datchery sees the woman shake her
fists at Jasper in church, and hears from her that she knows Jasper
“better far than all the reverend parsons put together know him.”
Datchery then adds a long thick line to his chalked score, yet, says Mr.
Walters, Datchery has learned “nothing new to Edwin Drood, if alive.”

This is an obvious error.  It is absolutely new to Edwin Drood that the
opium hag is intimately acquainted with his uncle, Jasper, and hates
Jasper with a deadly hatred.  All this is not only new to Drood, if
alive, but is rich in promise of further revelations.  Drood, on
Christmas Eve, had learned from the hag only that she took opium, and
that she had come from town to Cloisterham, and had “hunted for a needle
in a bottle of hay.”  That was the sum of his information.  Now he learns
that the woman knows, tracks, has found, and hates, his worthy uncle,
Jasper.  He may well, therefore, add a heavy mark to his score.

We must also ask, How could Helena, fresh from Ceylon, know “the old
tavern way of keeping scores?  Illegible except to the scorer.  The
scorer not committed, the scored debited with what is against him,” as
Datchery observes.  An Eurasian girl of twenty, new to England, would not
argue thus with herself: she would probably know nothing of English
tavern scores.  We do not hear that Helena ever opened a book: we do know
that education had been denied to her.  What acquaintance could she have
with old English tavern customs?

If Drood is Datchery, then Dickens used a form of a very old and
favourite _ficelle_ of his: the watching of a villain by an improbable
and unsuspected person, in this case thought to be dead.  If Helena is
Datchery, the “assumption” or personation is in the highest degree
improbable, her whole bearing is quite out of her possibilities, and the
personation is very absurd.

Here the story ends.


CHAPTER: THE CHÂTEAUROUX


At thirty-five Boucher has arrived. He is in the vogue; in favour at
Court--as well as in the fashion. In his three years from taking his
seat at the Academy to the opening of the first Salon he has created a
new and original style--his cupid pieces, his pastorals, his
Venus-pieces, his tapestry. Boucher's kingdom lay in the realm of the
decorative painter--and he has found it. Torn from the surroundings
for which he designed them, as part and parcel of the general scheme,
his pictures are as out of place as an Italian altarpiece in an
English dining-room, yet they suffer less. Several may still be seen,
as he set them up in frames of his own planning, as overdoors in the
palace of the Soubise, now given up to the national archives.

The ghost of the Prince of Soubise, who commissioned them, may haunt
his palace, but his kin know the place no longer. The overdoors
wrought by Boucher's skill look down now on the nation's collection of
historic documents. The "Three Graces enchaining Love," the fine
pastoral of "The Cage," and the pastoral of the "Shepherd placing a
Rose in his Shepherdess's Hair," were to see a mightier change than
the usurpation of Louis the Fourteenth's pompous age by the elegant
years of Louis the Fifteenth. But this was not as yet. Here at least
we see Boucher's art rid of all outside influences, and at the full
tide of creation; here we have the inimitable lightness of touch, the
figures and landscape bathed in the airy volume of atmosphere.

He seems at this time to have played with pastel, due probably to his
friendship with Latour, who sent a portrait of Boucher's wife to this
Salon. Boucher showed in the use of chalks the artistry and skill that
were always at his command.

He also was putting to its full use his innate sense of landscape,
raising to high achievement that astonishing balance of landscape and
figures in his design--a balance that has never been surpassed; his
figures never override his landscape; his landscape never overpowers
his figures. His earnest counsels to his pupils and his constant
deploring of the lack of the landscape art in France prove the great
stress he laid upon it.

The designing of a frontispiece for the catalogue of a personal
friend, one Gersaint, a merchant of oriental wares, started Boucher in
his thirty-third year upon that series of Chinese pictures and
tapestries known as the "Chinoiseries," in which he frittered away
only too many precious hours, for they were received with great favour
by the public. The paintings of Chinese subjects designed for the
looms of Beauvais are still to be seen at Besançon.

But busy as were his brain and hand in the exercise of his wide and
versatile gifts, pouring out "Chinoiseries," illustrations for books,
tapestries on a large scale, landscapes, models for the gilt bronze
decorations of porcelain vases, scheming handsome frames for his
pictures, designing furniture and fans--Boucher was true, above all,
"to his goddess," and painted the famed "Birth of Venus," which,
thanks to the Swedish Ambassador's fondness for Madame Boucher, now
hangs at Stockholm; our amorous Count de Tessin, to be just, seems to
have had a rare flair for the artistic--besides artist's wives. It was
on the 15th of April in 1742, the last year of his thirties, that the
Royal favour was marked by the grant of a pension of 400 livres
(double florins) to Boucher with promise of early benefits to follow.

Two years afterwards it was raised to 600 livres.

This was the year that he painted the beautiful canvas of "Diana
leaving the Bath with one of her Companions," now at the Louvre. It
was also the year that saw his landscape, the "Hamlet of Issé" at the
Salon. This "Hameau d'Issé" was to be enlarged for the Opera, proving
him to be decorator there, where he was arranging waterfalls,
cascades, and the rest of the pretty business, without staying his
hand from his art.

At forty Boucher has come into his kingdom. The ten years of these
forties were to be a vast triumph for him. He was to produce
masterpiece after masterpiece. His art had caught the taste of the
day. He was at the height of his powers. He had done great things--he
was to do greater. During these ten years of his forties he poured
forth vivid and glowing works of sustained power and originality.

We have a picture of him as he was in the flesh at this time--the
pastel portrait by Lundberg, now at the Louvre--a gay, somewhat
dissipated, handsomely dressed dandy of the time, smiling out of his
careless day, the debonnair man of fashion, the laughing eyes showing
signs of the night carousals, which were the rest from the prodigious
toil of this vital and forthright spirit.

It was in this our artist's fortieth year that the gifted old Cardinal
Fleury, who had guided the fortunes of France with rare skill, died,
broken by his ninety years and the blunders of the disastrous war that
he had so strenuously opposed; and Louis, essaying the strut of
kingship, became king by act. His indolent character, unequal to the
mighty business, his indeterminate will fretted by the set of
quarrelling and intriguing rogues that he gathered about him as his
ministers, he fell into the habit that became his thenceforth, the
only thing to which he paid the tribute of constancy--he ruled France
from behind pretty petticoats. He had early shown the adulterous blood
of his great-grandfather; two, if not three, of five sisters of the
noble and historic house of De Nesle had yielded to his gadding fancy;
the youngest now ousted her sister De Mailly from the king's favour,
was publicly acknowledged as the king's mistress, and became Duchess
of Châteauroux. Boucher painted her handsome being as a shepherdess in
one of his pastorals. She was no ordinary toy of a king. A woman of
talent, with hot ambitions for the king's majesty, fired with the
pride of race of the old French noblesse, it was during her short
years of ascendancy over the king that he roused from his body's
torpor and made an effort to reach the dignity and eminence befitting
to the lord of a great and gallant people. He stepped forth awhile
from his drunken bouts and manifold mean adulteries, and set himself
at the head of the army in Flanders, and strutted it as conqueror.

Poor Châteauroux only got the hate of the people for reward, Louis the
honours; for the people resented the public dishonour of her state.

Power she found to be a dead-sea apple in her pretty mouth. The glory
of it all, the splendours, were not the easily won delights for which
she had looked. She had to fight a duel, that never ended, with the
king's witty, crafty, and scurrilous Prime Minister, the notorious
Maurepas--and Maurepas willed that no woman should ever come between
him and the king--Maurepas who knew no mercy, no decency, no chivalry,
no scruple. At Châteauroux's urging, Louis placed himself at the
head of the army; and France went near mad with joy that she had
again found a king. Crafty Maurepas urged on the business; the
Châteauroux suddenly realised his cunning glee--it separated her from
the king.

Out of the whirl of things Boucher's fortune was ripening, little as
he might suspect it.

He was painting masterpieces that make his name live. To his fortieth
year belong the famed "Birth of Venus," the "Venus leaving the Bath,"
the "Muse Clio," the "Muse Melpomene," and the three well-known
pastorals now at the Louvre--"The Sleeping Shepherdess," the "Nest,"


and the "Shepherd and Shepherdesses." Of the many famous Venus-pieces
that his hand painted during these years it is not easy to write the
list. But having signed the "Marriage of Love and Psyche" at
forty-one, he turned his experimental hand to the homely, realistic
Dutch style that was having a wide vogue, and painted the
"Dejeuner"--a family of the prosperous class of the day at
breakfast--showing with rare charm the surroundings and home life of
the well-to-do of his time.

All goes well with Boucher. He changes into better quarters in the Rue
de Grenelle-Saint-Honoré, where he lived for the next five years,
until 1749; but his eyes are fixed upon a studio and apartments at
the old palace of the Louvre, though the hard intriguing of his
powerful friends at Court on his behalf failed for some time. He had,
indeed, to make another move before he arrived at his longed-for goal.

Pensions Boucher, like others, had found to be somewhat empty affairs;
but rooms at the Louvre were a solid possession eagerly sought after
by the artists.

In this year of 1744 Boucher created a new fashion at the annual Salon
by sending studies and sketches instead of finished pictures; and it
set a value upon such things not before realised by artists, for
success was instant and loud.

Towards the end of the next, Boucher's forty-second year, the Swedish
Ambassador, Count de Tessin, who was to take his leave of Paris,
commissioned four pictures to represent the day of a woman of fashion,
and to be entitled "Morning," "Midday," "Evening," and "Night."

Boucher painted one of these for him, now known as the "Marchande de
Modes." The others were painted later, and all had a wide vogue as
engravings. The correspondence has interest since it reveals Boucher's
business habits; he was paid for a picture on its delivery, and for
each of these he was to receive 600 livres (double florins or
dollars)--about a hundred and twenty pounds.

In an official document of the Director of Buildings to the king (or
Minister of Fine Art, as we should say), written in this year of 1745,
Boucher being forty-two, is a "list of the best painters," in which
Boucher is singled out for distinction as "an historic painter, living
in the Rue de Grenelle-Saint-Honoré, opposite the Rue des Deux-Ecus,
pupil of Lemoyne, excelling also in landscape, grotesques, and
ornaments in the manner of Watteau; and equally skilled in painting
flowers, fruit, architecture, and subjects of gallantry and of
fashion."

Not so bad for dry officialdom; the critics could learn a lesson. For
he was nothing less. What indeed does he not do? and wondrous well!
this painter of the age.

And the mighty rush of events is about to sweep him into further
prominence; the very things which he probably passed by with a gay
shrug are to enrich him, to help him to his highest fulfilment.

Poor Châteauroux saw that she must lose the king's gadding favour in
the conflict with Maurepas unless she joined her lord, now with the
army. She realised full well that she had created the new Louis of
Ambition--that her going must bring the people's hate to her. But she
dared not lose the king. And she went. Maurepas had overdone his
jibings. The indiscretion at once rang through the land; became the
jest of the army--and Maurepas was not far from the bottom of the
business. The discreet indiscretion of covered ways between the king's
lodgings and hers only added to the mockeries, and increased the
people's hate against, of course, the Châteauroux. Then upon a day in
August the small-pox seized Louis at Metz; poor Châteauroux fought for
possession of the king in the sick room, until his fear of
death--Louis' sole piety--sent her packing--shrinking back in the
hired carriage at each halting-place for change of horses, lest she
should be seen and torn from her place and destroyed by the populace.

But Louis recovered; Paris rang with bells at joy on his recovery, and
he entered the city amidst mad enthusiasm, hailed as The Well-Beloved.

He sent for the Châteauroux to find her dying, Maurepas having to
deliver the message of recall. She died suddenly and in great agony,
swearing that Maurepas had poisoned her--died in the arms of her poor
discarded sister, the De Mailly.

But this year of 1745 Boucher hears a mightier scandal that is to mean
vast things to all France--and not least of all to François Boucher.


CHAPTER: THE POMPADOUR


A young bride had become the gossip of the rich merchant society of
Paris--that class that was ousting the old noblesse from power. She
was a beautiful, a remarkable woman; her wit was repeated in the
drawing-rooms, she had all the accomplishments; her charming
name--Madame Lenormant d'Etioles.

Draw aside the curtains of the past and we discover our little Jeanne
Poisson--grown into this exquisite creature. It has come about in
strange fashion enough. The father--a scandalous fellow--having
fingered the commissariat moneys in ugly ways to his own use, had been
banished for the ugly business. Nor is Jeanne's mother any better than
she should be; and the wags wink knowingly at the handsome and rich
man of fashion, Monsieur Lenormant de Tournehem, who has been the
favoured gallant during the absence of the light-fingered Poisson.

And, of a truth, Lenormant de Tournehem takes astonishing interest in
the little Jeanne--watching over her up-growing and giving her the
best of education at the convent, where she wins all hearts, and is
known as "the little queen." The truth spoken with wondrous prophecy,
if unthinkingly, as we shall see. Complacent Poisson came home, and
took the rich and fashionable, bland and smiling Lenormant de
Tournehem to his arms. Has he not wealth and estates? therefore as
excellent a friend for Poisson as for Madame Poisson. The girl Jeanne
leaves the convent to be taught the accomplishments by the supreme
masters of France, the wits foregather at Madame Poisson's, and the
brilliant Jeanne is soon mistress of the arts--coquetry not least of
all; has also the most exquisite taste in dress. Under all is a heart
cold as steel; calculating as the higher mathematics. She has but one
hindrance to ambition--her mean birth. Lenormant de Tournehem rids her
even of this slur by making his nephew, Lenormant d'Etioles, marry
her, giving the young couple half his fortune for dowry, and the
promise of the rest when he dies--also he grants him a splendid
town-house, as splendid a country seat. And consequential
self-respecting little Lenormant d'Etioles is lord of Etioles, amongst
other seignories. So Jane Fish appears as Madame Lenormant d'Etioles,
seductive, beautiful, accomplished, to whose house repair the new
philosophy, the wits, and artists. She has a certain sense of virtue;
indeed openly vows that no one but the king shall ever come between
her and her lord. But, deep in her heart, she has harboured a fierce
ambition--that the king shall help her to keep her bond. She puts
forth all her gifts, all her powers, to win to the strange goal;
confides it to her worldly mother and "uncle," Lenormant de Tournehem;
finds keen allies therein to the reaching of that strange goal. The
death of the Châteauroux clears the way. At a masked ball the king is
intrigued as to the personality of a beautiful woman who plagues him
with her art; he orders the unmasking. Madame Lenormant d'Etioles
stands revealed, drops her handkerchief as by accident; the whisper
runs through the Court that "the handkerchief has been thrown!" The
king stoops and picks it up. A few evenings later she is smuggled into
the "private apartments." She goes again a month later; in the morning
is seized with sudden terror--she daren't go back to her angry lord
lest he do her grievous harm; he will have missed her. The king is
touched; allows her to hide from henceforth in the secret apartments;
promises the beautiful creature a lodging, her husband's banishment,
and early acknowledgment as titular mistress--before the whole Court
at Easter, says the pious Great One. But he has to join the army to
play the Conqueror at Fontenoy; and it is later in the year
(September) before Madame d'Etioles is presented to the Court in a
vast company and proceeds to the queen's apartments to kiss hands on
appointment. Thus was Jeanne Poisson raised to the great aristocracy
of France in her twenty-third year as Marquise de Pompadour.

Boucher had been one of the brilliant group of artists of the
d'Etioles' circle. That the Pompadour's influence had much effect upon
his position at Court for a year or two is unlikely; for she had to
fight for possession of the king day and night, as the Châteauroux
had done, against the queen's party and the unscrupulous enmity of
Maurepas. To set down Boucher's favour at Court to her is ridiculous.

He was painting for the queen's apartments at thirty-one when the
Pompadour was a school-girl of twelve. But in the year following her
rise to power, Boucher painted four pictures for the large room of the
Dauphin, which were "placed elsewhere"; and, the year after that, he
was at work upon two pictures for the bedroom of the king at the
castle of Marly. It is likely enough that the Pompadour directed this
order. She had almost immediately secured the office of the
Director-General of Buildings, which covered the direction of the
royal art treasures, for "uncle" Lenormant de Tournehem, who was also
a friend of the artist. And from this year it is significant that
Boucher paints no more for the opposing camp of the Queen and Dauphin.

He was now giving all his strength to the "Rape of Europa" that he
painted for the competition ordered by the Academy at the command of
Lenormant de Tournehem in the king's name, in which ten chosen
Academicians were to paint subjects in their own style for six prizes
and a gold medal, to be awarded in secret vote by the competing
artists themselves. Boucher won, by his amiable nature, the good-will
of them all by proposing that they should so arrange as to share the
prizes equally, and thus prevent any sense of soreness inevitable in
the losers.

But greatly as he won the good-fellowship of his fellow-artists by it,
this picture caused a murmur to rise amongst the critics who,
aforetime loud in his praise, now began to complain of his "abuse of
rose tints" in the painting of the female nude. The fact was that
Diderot and the men of the New Philosophy were turning their eyes to
the whole foundations upon which France was built, art as well as
society, and were beginning to demand of art "grandeur and morality in
its subjects." They were soon to be clamouring for "the statement of a
great maxim, a lesson for the spectator." Diderot, with bull-like
courage, picked out the greatest, and turned upon Boucher, blaming him
for triviality.

The nations, weary of war, concluded the peace of Aix-la-Chapelle in
the October of 1748. No sooner was peace concluded than Louis
relapsed into his old habit of dandified indolence and profligate
ease; and, putting from him his duties as the lord of a great people,
he gave himself up to shameless intrigues. He allowed the Pompadour to
usurp his magnificence and to rule over the land. He yielded himself
utterly, if sometimes sulkily, to her domination; and for sixteen
years she was the most powerful person at Court, the greatest force in
the state--making and unmaking ministers, disposing of office,
honours, titles, pensions. All political affairs were discussed and
arranged under her guidance; ministers, ambassadors, generals
transacted their business in her stately boudoirs; the whole patronage
of the sovereign was dispensed by her pretty hands; the prizes of the
Church, of the army, of the magistracy could be obtained solely
through her favour and good-will. Her energy must have been
prodigious. Possessed of extraordinary talents and exquisite tastes,
she gave full rein to them, and it was in the indulgence of her better
qualities that Destiny brought Boucher into the friendship of this
wonderful woman. She became not only his patron but his pupil,
engraving several of his designs.

But this, her sovereignty over the king, easy and light in its outward
seeming, was a haggard nightmare to the calculating woman who had so
longed for it. She knew no single hour's rest from the night she won
to the king's bed. She had to fight her enemies, secret and open, for
possession of the king's will, day and night; and she fought--with
rare courage. She won by consummate skill and unending pluck. She made
herself an essential part of the king's freedom from care. The Court
party fought her for power with constant vigilance. Maurepas brought
all his unscrupulous art, all his ironic mimicry, all his vile jibes
and unchivalrous hatred to bear against her. He had made himself a
necessity to the king; and he never slept away a chance of injuring
her. He knew no mercy, no nobility, no pity. He made her the detested
object of the people. With his own hands he penned the witty verses
and epigrams that were sung and flung about the streets of Paris.

But she had an enemy more subtle than any at the Court--hour by hour
she had to dispute the king with the king's boredom. And it was in the
effort to do so that she created her celebrated theatre in the
private apartments, calling Boucher and others to her aid in the doing
of it. Here the noblest of France vied with each other to obtain the
smallest part to play, an instrument in its orchestra, an invitation
to its performances.

Boucher left the Opera to become its decorator in 1748, and did not
return until her death. For her, he also decorated her beautiful rooms
at Bellevue. She bought at high prices many of his greatest
masterpieces.

The Pompadour's power so greatly increased that she openly took
command of the king's will; dared and succeeded in getting his
favourite Maurepas banished; and herself took to the use of the kingly
"we." Her rascally father was created Lord of Marigny; her brother,
whom the king liked well and called "little brother," was created
Marquis de Vandières; her only child, Alexandrine, signed her name as
a princess of the blood royal, and would have been married to the
blood royal had she not caught the small-pox and died. She amassed a
private fortune, castles, and estates such as no mistress had dreamed
of; and into them she poured art treasures that cost the nation
thirty-six millions of money. She created the porcelain factory of
Sèvres, kept keen watch over the Gobelins looms, and founded the great
Military School of St. Cyr amidst work that would have kept several
statesmen busy, and of deadly intrigues at Court that would have
broken the spirit of many a brilliant man.

It was in her hectic desire to keep the king from being bored that she
stooped, and made Boucher stoop, to the employment of his high
artistry in the painting of a series of indecent pictures wherewith to
tickle the jaded desires of Boredom, and thereby gave rise to the
widespread impression that Boucher's art was ever infected by base
design. But Boucher was, at his very worst, but a healthy animal; and
even in these secret works for the king he did not reach so low as did
many an artist of more pious memory who painted with no excuse but his
own pleasure.

As a matter of fact, the Pompadour has been blamed too much for this
evil act, and too much forgotten for her splendid patronage of the man
who, under it and during these great years of his forties, produced a
series of masterpieces that place him in the foremost rank of the
painters of his century. It is impossible to reckon the number of the
pastorals and Venus-pieces that his master-hand painted and loved to
paint, during these the supreme years of his genius. It is significant
that they were painted during the years that saw the Pompadour in
supreme power.

Boucher was so firmly established in 1750, his forty-seventh year,
that he moved into a new house in the Rue Richelieu, near the Palais
Royal. Disappointed in not receiving a studio and apartments at the
Louvre, he was allowed to use a studio in the king's library. He was
now making money so easily that he was able to collect pictures and
precious stones and the gaily coloured curiosities that appealed to
his tastes.

The critics were becoming more and more censorious; and one of them
hits true with the comment that in his pastorals his shepherdesses
look as if they had stepped over from the Opera and would soon be off
again thereto.

In his forty-eighth year Boucher's art was at its most luminous
stage--his atmosphere clear and subtle and exquisitely rendered; his
yellows golden; his whites satin-like and silvery; his flesh-tones
upon the nude bodies of his goddesses unsurpassed by previous art. The
beauty of it all was not to last much longer.

Lenormant de Tournehem died suddenly in the November of 1751; the
Pompadour's brother, Abel Poisson de Vandières, was appointed
Director-General in his stead at the age of twenty-five--and soon
afterwards, on the death of his father, created Marquis de Marigny--a
shy, handsome youth, a gentleman and an honourable fellow, whom the
king liked well, and against whom his sister's sole complaint was that
he lacked the brazen effrontery of the courtiers of the day. No man
did more for the advancement of the art of his time. A pension of a
thousand livres falling vacant, the young fellow secured it for
Boucher; and almost immediately afterwards, a studio becoming vacant
at the Louvre owing to the death of Coypel, first painter to the king,
Boucher came to his coveted home, eagerly moving in with his family as
soon as its wretched state could be put into repair.

The decoration of the new wing to the palace at Fontainebleau brought
the commission for the painting of the ceiling and the principal
picture in the Council Chamber to Boucher, who had already decorated
the Dining-Room. This was the period of his painting the "Rising" and
the "Setting of the Sun" for the Pompadour, now in the Watteau
collection, two canvases that were always favourites with the painter,
bitterly as they were assailed by the critic Grimm.

He was turning out so much work that it was impossible to give as much
care to his pictures as he ought. For he refused sternly, his life
long, to raise his prices; by consequence he had to create a larger
amount of work in order to meet his expenditure. It was about this
time that Reynolds, passing through Paris, went to visit him and found
him painting on a huge canvas without models or sketches. "On
expressing my surprise," writes Reynolds, "he replied that he had
considered the model as necessary during his youth until he had
completed his study of art, but that he had not used one for a long
time past."

He soon had not the time, not only to paint from nature but even to
give his pictures the work necessary to complete them. The feverish
haste which took possession of him in his frantic endeavour to meet
the vast demand for his pictures, and the eager efforts of his
engravers to satisfy the public call for engravings after his works,
gave him less and less leisure to joy in their doing. And his eyesight
began to fail. His flesh-tints deepened to a reddish hue; and he
stands baffled before his work, suspecting his sight, since what every
one cries out upon as being bright vermilion, he only sees as a dull
earthy colour. Boucher has topped the height of his achievement; he
has to "descend the other side of the hill." Boucher begins to grow
old.

In Boucher's fifty-first year an ugly intrigue of the queen's party at
Court to sap the Pompadour's influence over the king by drawing away
the king's affections towards Madame de Choiseul-Romanet, a reckless
young beauty of the Court, brought about a strange alliance. The Count
de Stainville, one of the Pompadour's bitterest enemies, was shown the
king's letter of invitation to his young kinswoman; and he, deeply
wounded in his pride that his kinswoman should have been offered to
the king, went to the Pompadour and exposed the plot. A close
alliance followed; and De Stainville thenceforth became her chief
guide in affairs of state. It was at her instance that the king called
him to be his Prime Minister, raising him to the Duchy of Choiseul--a
name he made illustrious as one of the greatest Ministers of France.

In his fifty-second year Boucher was appointed to the directorship of
the Gobelins looms, to the huge delight of the weavers and all
concerned with the tapestry factory. This was the year of his painting
the famous portrait of the Pompadour, to whom he several times paid
this "tribute of immorality." For the Gobelins looms he produced many
handsome designs; and he was painting with astounding industry. But
his hand's skill began to falter. His art shows weariness in his
sixtieth year, and sickness fell upon him, and held him in servitude
now with rare moments of respite. The critics, notoriously Diderot,
were now attacking him with shameless virulence. Boucher passed it all
by; but he felt the change that was taking place in the public taste.

The ideas of the New Philosophy were infecting public opinion; the Man
of Feeling had arisen in the land; and France, humiliated in war, and
resenting the follies and the greed of her shameless privileged class,
was openly resenting it and all its works. Choiseul had planted his
strength deep in the people's party, and was come near to being its
god. His masterly mind had checked Frederick of Prussia to the North;
and the nations, exhausted by the struggle, signed the Peace of Paris
in 1763. Choiseul, with France at peace abroad, turned to the blotting
out of the turbulent order of the Jesuits at home. Their attempt to
end the Pompadour's relations with the king made this powerful woman
eager to complete his design; the chance was soon to come, and the
Order was abolished from France and its vast property seized by the
state.

The Pompadour lived but a short while to enjoy her triumph. Worn out
by her superhuman activities, assailed by debt, she fell ill of a
racking cough, dying on the 15th of April, 1764, in her forty-second
year, keeping her ascendancy over the king and the supreme power in
France to her last hour. Death found her transacting affairs of state.

Louis, weary of his servitude, had only a heartless epigram to cast
at the body of the dead woman as she passed to her last resting-place.


CHAPTER: CHAPTER III. - SACRIFICE.


BUT adoration is not all, for there is yet a further result of the
doctrine of the real objective presence, if possible, more dangerous even
than adoration; I mean the assertion of a continued sacrifice.  It is
extremely difficult to ascertain exactly what is held by the Ritualistic
party, for there is no document to which they all subscribe or for which
they can be held responsible; but there is quite enough to show that a
great number amongst them are teaching without reserve that there is in
the Lord’s Supper a continuation, or repetition, of the propitiatory
sacrifice of our blessed Lord.  The extent to which this is carried may
be gathered from a book called the Eucharist Manual, to which
Archbishop Longley drew the attention of the Church in the year 1867, in
which it is said that ‘a real, true, and substantial sacrifice is offered
to God the Father, and not merely a spiritual or metaphorical sacrifice;’
that the Holy Eucharist is ‘a true, real, and substantial sacrifice
offered to God the Father, offered for the quick and the dead;’ the
meaning of which statement is proved beyond the possibility of a doubt by
the following prayers: ‘Eternal Father, I offer thee the precious blood
of Jesus Christ, in expiation of my sins, and for the wants of the whole
Church;’ and ‘I now join Thy minister in offering Thee this oblation of
the body and blood of Thy Son, in propitiation for my numberless sins,
and for the salvation of all bound to me by kindred or affection.’
Nothing would be easier than to bring together almost any number of
similar passages, and I feel persuaded that I am not misrepresenting the
principles of the writers when I say that they teach the continuation or
repetition of the sacrifice of our blessed Lord Himself as a propitiation
for sin.  Now is this the teaching of the Church of England, or is it
not?  Dr. Pusey’s own language may, I think, decide the question.  In his
book, on the Real Presence, p. 311, he says of the Church’s documents:
‘Although the great act of Eucharistic Sacrifice remains in the
consecration itself, and it has been all along an object of belief in the
Church of England, it is mentioned only when we pray to God to accept
this our sacrifice of praise and thanksgiving.’  This then is the only
passage in all the documents of the Church of England which we may
presume can be produced as being in favour of this teaching, and I
venture to say that Dr. Pusey is far too good a theologian not to know
that the passage is dead against the doctrine of propitiatory sacrifice.

Is it possible to suppose that such a learned man as he is does not know
the distinction between a sacrifice of expiation and a sacrifice of
praise and thanksgiving, between an atonement for sin and the free-will
offering of a thankful and loving heart?  And is it possible that there
should be one moment’s doubt as to the teaching of the Church of England,
when the words, which he himself acknowledges, are the only words which
he can discover in support of the one are words which beyond all
controversy refer exclusively to the other?

But is the Church of England as silent as he appears to consider it on
this important subject?  Are we left to gather its great principles from
that one passage in the Communion Service?  Does it teach nothing on the
subject of propitiatory sacrifice but in that one short sentence which
has in fact no connexion with it?  The whole of the Church of God depends
on a completed propitiation, and we might well tremble for the Church of
England if that one great central fact were altogether out of sight in
its teaching.  But, thanks be to God! it is not thus ignored, for this is
just one of those points for which our Reformers were called to suffer,
and respecting which they were most explicit.

To begin with the Articles.  The thirty-first consists of three parts.

(1.) The perfect sufficiency of the great propitiation for sin.  ‘The
offering of Christ once made’ (observe the once) ‘is that perfect
redemption, propitiation, and satisfaction for all the sins of the whole
world, both original and actual.’  (2.) The declaration that in
consequence of that sufficiency there can be no further propitiation.

‘There is none other satisfaction for sin, but that alone.’  (3.) The
condemnation of the pretended sacrifice of the mass.  ‘Wherefore the
sacrifice of masses, in the which it was commonly said that the priest
did offer Christ for the quick and dead, to have remission of past guilt,
were blasphemous fables and dangerous deceits.’  I am not ignorant that
an attempt has been made to represent this Article as referring to the
abuses which had gathered around the sacrifice of the mass, and not
against the principle of sacrifice itself.  As I should be extremely
sorry to misrepresent the opinions of those who differ from me, I quote
Dr. Pusey’s words as I find them in his Eirenicon, p. 25: ‘The very
strength of the expressions used, of “the sacrifices of masses,” that
they were blasphemous fables and dangerous deceits, the use of the
plural, and the clause “in which it was commonly said,” show that what
the Article speaks of is not the sacrifice of the mass, but the habit
(which, as one hears from time to time, still remains) of trusting to the
purchase of masses when dying, to the neglect of a holy life, or
repentance, and the grace of God and His mercy in Christ Jesus while in
health.’  To what desperate shifts are persons driven who would endeavour
to represent the Church of England as teaching the sacrifice of the mass!

The Article declares the sufficiency and finality of the one sacrifice of
our blessed Lord and Saviour, and because that one sacrifice is
sufficient and final, it condemns in the strongest possible language the
opinion current at the time, that in some form or other there was a
repetition of sacrifice in the mass.  But because the language is strong,
because there is an allusion to the current opinion, and because the
plural number is employed so as to comprehend the numberless sacrifices
supposed to be offered on the numberless altars of the Church of Rome,
therefore it is argued that the Article does not refer to the doctrine of
sacrifice at all, but simply to the purchase of the mass in the dying
hour, instead of repentance and faith during the life.  If the Article
were meant to condemn the purchase of masses, it is very strange that it
makes no allusion to the subject; and if it aimed at the neglect of
repentance and faith, it is most extraordinary that neither repentance
nor faith is once mentioned in its words.  Our Reformers were very
plain-spoken men, and it appears from the strength of their language that
they meant to be plain-spoken in the Article.  It is very strange if,
after all, while they appeared to condemn one thing, they were really
condemning another, and did it in such unintelligible language that their
meaning was not discovered till three hundred years after the Article was
written.

In the Catechism there is not much said on the subject, but that little
is decisive.  There is only one allusion to sacrifice, and that is, to
the one sacrifice of our blessed Saviour, while the Lord’s Supper is
distinctly declared to be an act of remembrance of that great event.

‘Q.  Why was the Sacrament of the Lord’s Supper ordained?’  ‘A.  For
the continual remembrance of the sacrifice of the death of Christ, and of
the benefits which we receive thereby.’  It is needless to stop to point
out that remembrance cannot mean either continuation, repetition, or
application; and with such a distinct passage before us, it is manifest
that no one can claim the Catechism as teaching the doctrine of
propitiatory sacrifice in the Lord’s Supper.  There is an opinion in some
minds that the language of the Catechism is less distinctly Protestant
than that of the other documents.  That opinion I believe to be
thoroughly mistaken, and it certainly is very difficult to understand by
what perversion of language the doctrine of propitiatory sacrifice can be
wrung from such language as ‘The continual remembrance of the sacrifice
of the death of Christ,’ and a ‘thankful remembrance of His death,’ as we
find in the answer with which the Catechism concludes.

From the Catechism let us turn to the Communion Service.  And here we are
met at the outset by Dr. Pusey’s remarkable admission, that the only
passage teaching the doctrine is the language of thankful dedication in
the prayer that follows the reception: ‘We, Thy humble servants, entirely
desire Thy Fatherly goodness mercifully to accept this our sacrifice of
praise and thanksgiving.’  No person who understands the difference
between propitiation and thanksgiving can fail to see at a glance that
there is no reference in this passage to propitiatory sacrifice.  The
next sentence is: ‘Here we offer and present unto Thee, O Lord,
ourselves, our souls and bodies, to be a reasonable, holy, and lively
sacrifice unto Thee.’  ‘Ourselves, our souls and bodies,’ what are they
to make a propitiation for sin?  Nothing can be plainer than that the
prayer is intended to be the language of the thankful heart surrendering
itself as a thank-offering to God.  If the language admitted of the
smallest doubt, that doubt would be removed by the position assigned to
it in the Communion Service of 1552.  In that of 1549 it stood with
certain additions before the administration of the sacramental elements,
but the human mind is so prone to misunderstand the simplest documents,
that our Reformers, to avoid all possibility of mistake, first removed
from the prayer any expressions which they thought could be
misunderstood, and then placed it after, instead of before, the reception
of the elements.  Thus they secured that there should be no room for
doubt that the sacrifice referred to is the surrender of self, and the
motive for that surrender, not the desire for forgiveness, but the deep
gratitude of a thankful heart, when sin has been blotted out through a
finished atonement, and the appropriation of that atonement has been
sealed to the soul by the sacred emblems of His body and blood.

But these were not the only changes made in the Communion Service of
1552.  There was another of a most important character in connexion with
the subject of sacrifice.  You never hear of sacrifice without an altar.

The altar is, in fact, an essential adjunct of sacrifice, and accordingly
in former times there was an altar, generally made of stone, against the
eastern wall of the chancel.  Accordingly in the Communion Service of
1549, there is frequent mention of the altar; but in 1552 all altars were
abolished.  There is no allusion to an altar now in any document of the
Church of England.  When persons speak of leading brides to the altar,
they are not using the language of the Church, nor are they presenting
the holy rite of marriage in a very happy aspect, for the expression
really implies that the poor bride is led to sacrifice.  There is now
nothing but a table known in the Church of England.  The altar has been
removed, and the table introduced, in order that all might see even in
the Church’s furniture, that the doctrine of sacrifice has been
abandoned, and that the doctrine of communion is the true creed of the
Church of England.  It may be sufficient to refer to the fourth rubric as
a specimen of the changes made.  In 1549 it was, ‘The priest standing
humbly afore the midst of the altar shall say,’ &c.  In 1552, ‘The table
having at the Communion time a fair white linen cloth upon it, shall
stand in the body of the church or in the chancel, where Morning Prayer
and Evening Prayer be appointed to be said.  And the priest standing at
the north side of the table shall say,’ &c.

And now for the Homilies, the last authority to which we have to refer in
this inquiry.  I am not surprised that those who maintain the doctrine of
a continuation of propitiatory sacrifice preserve a prudent silence with
reference to the Homilies.  I do not know of any one passage ever quoted
by them in support of their opinions, while every allusion to the subject
in the Homilies is of a distinctly opposite character.  Let us turn to
one or two passages from the 15th Homily of the Second Book.  In the
first page of that Homily we have a general description of the Sacred
Feast.  ‘Amongst the which means is the public celebration of the memory
of His precious death at the Lord’s Table: which, although it seems of
small virtue to some, yet being rightly done by the faithful, it doth not
only keep their weakness, but strengtheneth and comforteth their inward
man with peace and gladness, and maketh them thankful to their Redeemer
with diligent care and godly conversation.’  Here we have the description
of the same two purposes as are mentioned in the Articles and Catechism,
but not one syllable respecting sacrifice, for no one who values
correctness in language can maintain that memory is continuation, or that
the memory of His precious death can be a renewed act of propitiation.

But this may be thought to be only an omission.  Let us pass on then to
the following page, when we read, ‘For as that worthy man, St. Ambrose,
saith: “He is unworthy of the Lord that otherwise doth celebrate that
mystery than it was delivered by Him.  Neither can he be devout that
otherwise doth presume that it was otherwise given by the Author.”  We
must, therefore, take heed lest of the memory it be made a sacrifice;
lest of a Communion it may be made a private eating; lest of two parts we
have but one; lest in applying it for the dead we lose the fruit that be
alive.’  In the Homily for Whit Sunday, the self-same truth is taught,
with almost equal clearness.  When it is said of the Church of Rome that
they ‘have so intermingled their own traditions and inventions, by
chopping and changing, by adding and plucking away, that now they (the
Sacraments) may seem to be converted into a new guise.  Christ commended
to His Church a Sacrament of His body and blood; they have changed it
into a sacrifice for the quick and the dead.’  And yet notwithstanding
all these statements and many others, there are those who hold office as
clergymen of the Church of England, who are not ashamed of circulating
such a book as the ‘Eucharist Manual,’ in which it is said: ‘The Holy
Eucharist is a true and substantial sacrifice offered to God the Father,
offered for the quick and dead.’
Here, then, I may conclude.  My object, let it be well remembered, has
not been to discuss the subject from the Scriptures, but to ascertain the
real teaching of the Church of England respecting it.  Let it not be
supposed for one moment that I have taken this position from any idea
that there is any infallible rule of faith but God’s own Word as revealed
in Scripture; but I have done so because the Church of England is at this
present time sorely tried by internal difficulties, and it seems only due
to her to ascertain with the utmost care what is the real character of
her teaching.  While some are loudly claiming her as teaching those very
doctrines in opposition to which our Reformers went to the stake, and
while others of a tender conscience are forsaking her because they
partially believe those bold statements to be true, it is of the utmost
possible importance that those who are faithful to the Church of England
should take the trouble to make themselves acquainted with her true
principles.  If it is a fact that she is identical with Rome, and that
the Reformers were martyrs for a merely imaginary metaphysical
distinction of no importance whatever; then, indeed, we may stand aghast
at the ignorance and folly of all the theologians of all schools and all
countries who have been weak enough to suppose that in the Reformation
there was a doctrinal separation from the Apostasy of Rome.  But if, on
the other hand, the Reformers knew what they were doing, and why they did
it; if they drew up these documents with the utmost care, and these
documents so provoked the doctrinal antipathies of Rome, that while their
authors were sacrificed at the stake their principles were branded by the
anathemas of the Council of Trent; if none of our most thoughtful
students for the last three centuries ever for one moment doubted that
there was direct antagonism between the Church of England and that of
Rome; then it is too sad to be borne that devout men, dearly beloved in
the Lord, staunch to the great principles of the Gospel of the Grace of
God, should have their consciences wounded, and their allegiance shaken,
by the unproved assertions of men who, without any appeal to the Church’s
documents, claim to be the only expositors of its principles.  It is
moreover most deeply to be deplored that those who have a real, true, and
faithful love for the Church of England should be led into error by the
unproved assertion that the Church of England teaches that which she most
emphatically denies.  It is for the sake of both classes that I have been
led to this investigation.  If any are unsettled in their mind and
disposed to distrust the Church of England, I shall rejoice if they are
led to see how sound, how clear, and how perfectly Scriptural she is upon
the subject.  And if any have been led by mistaken ideas of the Church’s
teaching to hold opinions at variance with the great principles of the
Reformation, I shall thank God more than I can express if they may be led
to see what the Church which they love really teaches, that so the love
of their Church may confirm them in the love of truth, and help to
establish them as steady and consistent Churchmen in the faith once
delivered to the saints.