-THE ALTAR OF THE DEAD-


CHAPTER: CHAPTER I. - THE REAL PRESENCE.


THIS lies at the foundation of the whole controversy, and to this our
first and chief attention must be directed.  Now, there can be no doubt
on the minds of those who take the Word of God as their true and only
guide that it is the sacred privilege of the Children of God to feed by
faith on the most precious body and blood of our blessed Saviour.  I am
not now discussing in what way we feed on Him, or whether His words in
the 6th chapter of St. John refer, or do not refer, to the Sacrament of
the Lord’s Supper.  It is my own belief that they do not; but that is not
the present question.  My present concern is with the fact that, however
we explain His words, we are taught by our Lord Himself that such a
feeding is essential to our life: ‘Except ye eat the flesh of the Son of
Man, and drink His blood, ye have no life in you.’  Nor can there be any
doubt that in 1 Cor. x. 16, 17, the partaking (κοινωνία) of the body
and blood of Christ is connected with the Lord’s Supper.  I am not now
making any assertion as to the way in which it is connected, for that is
the great point to be determined.  All that I now say is that there
clearly is a connexion, for the words are: ‘The cup of blessing which we
bless, is it not the communion of the blood of Christ?  The bread which
we break, is it not the communion of the body of Christ?  For we being
many, are one bread and one body; for we are all partakers of that one
bread.’
Two things, therefore, seem plain from Scripture: that there is a feeding
on the body and blood of our most blessed Saviour, without which none can
live, and that the Sacrament of the Lord’s Supper is in some way or other
connected with that sacred privilege.  Thus far, I presume, we are all
agreed.  But as to the nature of the connexion, there is the widest
possible divergence.  Rome teaches that by the act of consecration the
bread and wine become Christ Himself; that the bread and wine cease to be
bread and wine, and that both the bread and wine become each of them a
whole Christ, body, soul, and divinity.  The advocates for the doctrine
of the Real Presence in the Church of England differ, as far as I can
understand them, from Rome in one respect, and one only; namely, that
they maintain that the bread and wine do not cease to have the accidents
of bread and wine, so that they may still be spoken of as bread and wine,
although they have become the body and blood of Christ, or rather Christ
Himself.  This slight difference is of no practical importance in the
discussion, and appears to have been introduced only to avoid the
conclusion drawn from those texts which speak of the bread as bread, and
the wine as wine, after consecration.  The practical conclusion is the
same, viz. that our Lord Jesus Christ Himself is in the bread and in the
wine.  This is what is meant by the expression, ‘The real objective
presence.’  It means that He is present in the elements as a real
independent object, without any reference to the character of the
recipient, as a book is an independent object in the hand of the man who
holds it, without any reference to his state of mind or character.  In
opposition to this, it is maintained by us who cling to the great
principles of the Reformation, that there is no change whatever in the
bread and wine, that they are solemnly set apart for sacramental use by
means of consecration, but that they remain exactly the same as before
consecration, in substance, and accidents, and everything else.  That the
most precious body and blood of Christ is altogether spiritual food, and
that the soul feeds on it by faith, and faith alone.  That there are two
perfectly distinct kinds of food, the one material, and the other
spiritual; the one for the body, the other for the soul; and two
perfectly distinct actions; the one of the body eating the bread, the
other of the soul feeding on Christ Himself by faith.  That the material
food is an emblem of the spiritual; and that the act of eating by the
body is an emblem of the act of feeding by the soul; and the manner of
the two are so far connected by sacramental appointment, that when we
receive the emblem we are warranted to expect the enjoyment of the
reality.  When the body feeds materially on the one, the believer’s heart
feeds spiritually on the other; but the two acts are distinct, and the
one must not be confounded with the other.  From this statement it will
appear that the point at issue is, whether the precious body and blood of
our blessed Lord and Saviour are in the bread and in the wine, so as to
be eaten and drunk whenever, and by whomsoever, the elements are
received, or whether the spiritual food described in this expression is
received by the soul alone without being localised in the consecrated
elements.  And my object is to endeavour to ascertain which of these two
systems is taught by the Church of England.  That dear old Church is at
this present time in a position to call forth the deepest anxiety and the
most earnest prayers of all those who love the truth.  Some are
endeavouring to destroy it, some to corrupt it, and some to uphold it in
its integrity.  In such a state of things it is not fair that the Church
should be held responsible for the assertions even of its friends.  Its
own voice ought to be heard, and its own clear statement carefully
studied.  I have no intention, therefore, of endeavouring to confuse the
subject by a mass of quotations from collateral writers, but will turn at
once to those authoritative documents for which the Church has made
herself responsible.  These are the Articles, Catechism, Liturgy, and
Homilies; and these, if it please God, we will examine in order.

The Articles.—There are seven Articles—xxv. to xxxi.—bearing more or
less upon the subject; and from these we may gather the real teaching of
our Church.  The first of them, the twenty-fifth, refers to sacraments in
general.  ‘Sacraments ordained of Christ be not only badges or tokens of
Christian men’s professions, but rather they be certain sure witnesses
and effectual signs of grace, and God’s good will towards us, by the
which He doth work invisibly in us, and doth not only quicken, but also
strengthen and confirm our faith in Him.’  In other words, before men
they are badges of our profession, and before God they are signs or
witnesses by which God works invisibly in the soul.  In this definition
there is no idea of any change in the substance of the sign.  The sign is
not described as being changed into the thing signified, but as being
accompanied by it, so that when the believer with the hand and lip
visibly receives the sign, it pleases God in His own great grace
invisibly to feed the soul and confirm the faith.  The visible sign and
the invisible gift are therefore kept quite distinct.  The one is
mercifully granted in connexion with the other, but never said to be
incorporated with it, for the sign would cease to be a sign if it were
changed into the thing signified.  With this definition of a Sacrament,
the 27th Article—which describes that of baptism—exactly agrees.  It
describes it not merely as a badge of a Christian man’s profession, but
also declares that it is a sign and means of grace.  ‘A sign of
regeneration or new birth;’ a ‘means whereby as by an instrument, they
that receive baptism rightly (1) are grafted into the Church; (2) the
promises of forgiveness of sin, and of our adoption to be the sons of God
by the Holy Ghost, are visibly signed and sealed; (3) faith is confirmed,
and grace increased by virtue of prayer unto God.’  But no change is here
described as taking place in the water.  It is nowhere said to be changed
into regeneration.  The gifts described are God’s direct gifts to the
soul, and are never said to be infused into the element of water.  The
water is sanctified, or set apart for sacramental use, but the
consecration produces no change in its quality or substance.  The new
birth is not in the water, but is the act of the Holy Spirit moving in
the soul.  The minister on earth visibly administers the visible sign to
the body, and we trust that God in heaven invisibly bestows the invisible
gift on the soul.  It is not my business now to discuss the connexion
between the visible sign and the invisible gift.  It is enough for my
present purpose to point out that the one is not changed into the other,
but that the water remains water, or, in other words, that the sign does
not cease to be a sign, as it would do if it were changed into the thing
signified.

Now it would be strange indeed if after having first given so perfectly
clear a general definition of the general nature of a sacrament, and
having so clearly defined baptism, in perfect harmony with that general
definition, our Church were afterwards to teach a doctrine respecting the
Lord’s Supper, altogether at variance with the general definition, and
with her own explanation of the other sacrament.  The Church of England
includes both sacraments in one definition, and in that definition she
never alludes to any change in the sign or elements.  In the sacrament of
baptism, no one, I believe, would for a moment assert the existence of
such a change, even if there were no special Article on the subject.  Our
conclusion therefore must be, that, according to the Church’s teaching,
there is no change in the elements in the Lord’s Supper.  As the water in
baptism remains water still, so the bread and wine of the Lord’s Supper
remain what they were before, plain, simple bread and wine; dedicated, it
is true, to the Lord’s service, but altogether unchanged by such
dedication.

But we are not left to depend altogether on such conclusions, for there
is a special Article on the subject, viz., the twenty-eighth.  In the
first clause we find the Lord’s Supper described as both sacraments were
described in the twenty-fifth, and baptism in the twenty-seventh, as a
sign and means of grace.  ‘The Supper of the Lord is not only a sign of
the love which Christians ought to have among themselves one to another;
but rather is a sacrament of our redemption by Christ’s death, inasmuch
that to such as rightly, worthily, and with faith receive the same, the
bread which we break is a partaking of the body of Christ; and likewise
the cup of blessing is a partaking of the blood of Christ.’  Having gone
thus far in harmony with their general definition, and having quoted the
words from 1 Cor. x., our Reformers were clearly brought to the
consideration of the very point under discussion, viz., in what way does
the soul of the believer partake in the Lord’s Supper of the body and
blood of his blessed Lord and Saviour?  This question they boldly and
clearly answer, declaring in the first place, what is not, and in the
second place, what is, the truth respecting it.  They first declare that
it is not by transubstantiation.  ‘Transubstantiation (or the change of
the substance of bread and wine), in the Supper of the Lord cannot be
proved by Holy Writ; but is repugnant to the plain words of Scripture,
overthroweth the nature of a sacrament’ (because if the sign is changed
into the thing signified, it ceases to be a sign), ‘and hath given
occasion to many superstitions.’  It would be fruitless to endeavour to
trace the sophistry with which those who desire reconciliation of the
Church of England with Rome, have endeavoured to avoid the clear
statements of this pungent Article.  But their conclusion is one which is
such an outrage on common sense that it would be utterly ludicrous if it
were not inexpressibly melancholy, to see men who, we hope, are devout
men, embracing it.  We are now deliberately told that the Article was not
directed against the doctrine of transubstantiation at all, but against a
change for which the name of ‘transaccidentation’ has been recently
adopted.  Now I know we live in an age of discovery, but it is difficult
for any person of plain common sense, to believe in such a discovery as
this.  No one who knows anything of the history of the Reformation can be
ignorant of the intense eagerness with which the doctrine of
transubstantiation was discussed.  In books, in sermons, in public
disputations, it was argued again and again, by all the most learned
theologians of the day.  The speculations of the schoolmen as well as the
writings of the early fathers were largely quoted.  The very distinction
now revived between substance and accident was carefully discussed.  And
men felt so deeply the wide difference between the teaching of Rome and
the teaching of Scripture that they could not yield even to save their
lives.  The stake was before them as the certain issue of their
confession, and liberty and honour was the promised reward if only they
would yield.  But they had that deep conviction of the deadly error of
the doctrine of transubstantiation that they counted it a privilege
rather to die than to deny the truth of God.  And I put it to any man of
common sense and common honesty: is it possible to believe that, after
all, there was no real difference between Rome and the Reformers?  That
Bonner and Gardiner, and Latimer, Cranmer, and Ridley did, in fact,
agree; that there might have been a little confusion in some of their
minds as to the difference between substance and accident, so that they
used the word transubstantiation without knowing its real meaning, but
that in all essential points they were agreed, so that the fires of
Smithfield were lighted all by mistake, and men who were burned agreed
with them that burned them.  Clever men and learned men may put forth
such a theory, but common sense revolts against it; and all thinking men
must agree that, if this be the only theory on which it can be
maintained, the doctrine of the Real Objective Presence is not the
doctrine of the Church.  Plain honest men will be ready to cry ‘shame’ on
those who by theological sophistry are endeavouring to evade the plain
and incontestable evidence of the great facts of the Reformation.  The
Reformers knew well enough what Rome meant by ‘transubstantiation,’ and
the twenty-eighth Article is decisive on the point that there is no such
change in the Supper of the Lord.

But the error having been denied, the next clause of the Article is
employed to assert the truth: ‘The body of Christ is given, taken, and
eaten in the Supper only after an heavenly and spiritual manner; and the
means whereby the body of Christ is received and eaten in the Supper is
Faith.’  It is most important to observe that word ‘only,’ for it is
exclusive of all material feeding.  If it were not there it might have
been possible to have argued that the Article admits the idea of a
material in addition to a spiritual feeding—a feeding with the mouth as
well as a feeding with the heart.  But the word ‘only’ renders any such
theory impossible.  There is ‘only’ one manner in which He is received,
and that one manner is heavenly and spiritual.  With equal clearness it
is declared that as there is only one mode in which the body of our
blessed Saviour is received, and that heavenly and spiritual; so there is
only one mean whereby it is received and eaten, and that one mean is
faith.  The Article does not speak of a means, as if it was one of many
but of ‘the means’ in order to show that it stands quite alone, that it
is only spiritual food, and received only by faith.  The lips receive the
bread, and the believing heart receives the spiritual food of Christ
Himself.  The body feeds on the material food, the soul on the spiritual.

The means whereby the body feeds is the same as in common eating, and the
means on which the soul feeds is faith.

This important distinction of the outward and inward action is taught
with equal clearness in Article xxix.:—‘Of the wicked which eat not the
body of Christ in the Lord’s Supper.’  It may seem strange at first sight
that any persons should be eager to maintain that the wicked receive so
sacred a gift as the body and blood of our blessed Saviour; but a very
slight reflection will show the reason, for on this question hinges the
whole controversy.  If the bread and wine have become the body and blood
of the Lord Jesus Christ, or if after consecration He is in them, then it
must follow as a matter of certain consequence that whoever eats them
eats Him.  But if, on the other hand, He is not in the bread and wine at
all, but is received by the heart as the bread and wine are by the body,
then it follows that if the heart be not right with God, a person may eat
the bread, but never feed on the body and blood of our most blessed Lord
and Saviour.  The whole question whether there is any independent,
localized presence of our blessed Redeemer in the elements is involved in
the decision whether the wicked in receiving those elements do or do not
receive Him.  On this point the language of the twenty-ninth Article is
perfectly clear:—‘The wicked and such as be void of a lively faith,
although they do carnally and visibly press with their teeth (as St.
Augustine saith) the sacrament of the body and blood of Christ, yet in no
wise are they partakers of Christ; but rather to their condemnation do
eat and drink the sign or sacrament of so great a thing.’  In quoting
this Article I am not ignorant of the attempt that has been made to
represent it as teaching that, although the wicked do eat the body of
Christ they do not receive His life-giving blessings.  But the Article
does not say one word of blessings.  It is headed with the words, ‘Of the
wicked which eat not the body of Christ.’  It describes the bread as
being a sign of the body, and it affirms as clearly as language can
affirm that a wicked person may press the sign with his teeth, but still
be in no wise either materially, spiritually, with the body or with the
soul, a partaker of Christ.  According to this Article a person may eat
the bread without eating the body of Christ, and receive the wine, but
never drink the blood of Christ.  If the bread and wine had by
consecration become the body and blood, this clearly would be impossible,
for the one being changed into the other, the two would be inseparable,
or rather, they would cease to be two, they would be one.  It is clear,
therefore, that no such change is taught here; and this conclusion is
remarkably confirmed by the Rubric at the close of the Service for the
Communion of the Sick, for there the same great principle is maintained
with equal clearness, only from a different point of view, when it says,
‘If a man . . . by just impediment do not receive the Sacrament of
Christ’s body and blood, the curate shall instruct him that if he do
truly repent himself of his sins, and steadfastly believe that Jesus
Christ hath suffered death upon the Cross for him, and shed His blood for
his redemption, earnestly remembering the benefits he hath thereby, and
giving Him hearty thanks therefore, he doth eat and drink the body and
blood of our Saviour Christ, profitably to his soul’s health, although he
doth not receive the Sacrament with his mouth.’  I venture to say that
nothing can be clearer than the combined testimony of these two most
important documents.  The Article says, ‘That a bad man may receive with
his mouth the Sacrament of the body of Christ, but not be partaker of
Christ.’  The Rubric says that a believer may under certain circumstances
eat and drink the body and blood of our Saviour Christ, although he do
not receive the Sacrament with his mouth.  And if this is not a
sufficient proof that according to the teaching of the Church of England,
the sign or Sacrament is not changed into the thing signified, I can
imagine no proof that can be given.  If they are made one by the act of
consecration, neither one nor the other can be received alone.

Summing up, then, the teaching of the Articles, we shall arrive at five
important conclusions: (1.) A Sacrament is a sign, and a sign would cease
to be a sign if it were changed into the thing signified.  (2.) In the
Sacrament of baptism there is no change in the water.  (3.) The doctrine
of transubstantiation is condemned as clearly as words can condemn it.

(4.) The body of Christ is said to be received only after a heavenly and
spiritual manner.  (5.) The wicked are declared to be in no wise
partakers of the sacred body and blood of our blessed Lord, though with
the mouth they eat the sign.  And yet, notwithstanding all this, there
are those who boldly affirm that the doctrine of the real presence of our
blessed Lord and Saviour in the elements is the undoubted teaching of the
Church of England.

Catechism.—But is not the doctrine taught in the Catechism?  And if we
look carefully, shall we not find it there?  One writer is so confident
that we shall, that he boldly affirms that the Catechism is the final and
authoritative decision of the Church on the subject, and must supersede
all previous documents; as if five short questions and answers, drawn up
for the use of children, were to override the full, dogmatic, and
controversial decisions of the Articles.  I am not surprised at his wish
to draw attention from the Articles, but I am persuaded he will gain
nothing by directing it to the Catechism.  I have no doubt that the
portion of the Catechism relating to the Sacraments is simply an
abbreviation, or adaptation, of the Articles.  The same arrangement is
adopted, and the same definitions occur, in both documents.  The first
three questions refer to Article xxv., the next to Article xxvii., the
next to Article xxviii.  The two Sacraments are first included in one
common definition.  The Sacrament of baptism is then discussed
separately, and I presume that no one would venture to affirm that either
in the general definition of a Sacrament, or in the particular definition
of baptism, the outward sign is ever said to be changed into, or
confounded with, the thing signified.  In these two definitions they are
kept distinct, and if the Catechism teaches any such change in the Lord’s
Supper, it must make a marked and most important distinction between the
two Sacraments, and so neutralize its own general definition, which is
carefully drawn to include them both.  It would, indeed, be strange if
there were such an inconsistency in so short a passage.  But, thanks be
to God, there is nothing of the kind, and the whole is in perfect harmony
both with itself and with the Articles.  It is difficult to imagine a
clearer and more marked distinction than that expressed in the second and
third questions, ‘What is the outward part, or sign, of the Lord’s
Supper?’ and ‘What is the inward part or thing signified?’  The
distinctness between the two parts is here more clearly marked than even
in the Articles, for in these two questions there is not merely the
distinction which we have in them between the sign and the thing
signified, but the one is described as outward and the other inward.  The
one is a material thing, which the recipient may take in his hand, and
which is altogether external to himself; the other is inward and
invisible, something within the soul, and only seen by the inner man.  It
is, therefore, utterly contrary to the teaching of these two questions to
suppose that both parts of the Sacrament are outward, and that the inward
and spiritual grace has a localized, outward presence external to the
soul of the recipient.

But though the questions are thus distinct, can we say the same of the
answers?  The third answer is often boldly appealed to as deciding the
question in favour of what is termed the real presence, and as finally
settling the whole controversy.  But nothing is easier than to make bold
assertions of the kind, to persuade men to receive them without the
trouble of investigation.  But such a system will not satisfy those who
desire to know the truth.  Let us then examine the answer carefully.

‘What is the inward part or thing signified?’  ‘The body and blood of
Christ; which are verily and indeed taken, and received by the faithful
in the Lord’s Supper.’  Great stress is sometimes laid on the words,
‘Verily and indeed,’ as if they meant something more than a spiritual
feeding on Christ.  But there is nothing in them to convey any such idea.

All they teach is that there is a real, true gift, really enjoyed and
received by the devout communicant; and this we all thankfully believe.

The question between us is not whether there is such a gift; but what is
its character, and how is it received.  The reality of the gift does not
prove that it is material, external, or connected in any way with the
natural elements.  To maintain this would be to deny the reality of
anything spiritual and internal.  Nothing, therefore, can be proved
either way from the words, ‘Verily and indeed.’  They cannot be quoted in
opposition to the question to which they are intended as an answer, or in
deciding that the inward part is outward.  They do assert that the gift
of the Lord is no mere fiction or idea, but they do not teach in any way
whatever that the sacred gift is in the elements, and external to the
soul.

But we have not yet done with this important answer, for there are two
more most important points to be noticed in it.  In the first place it is
clearly stated that it is ‘Verily and indeed taken, and received by the
faithful.’  One ingenious writer endeavours to make out that the word
‘faithful’ is here intended to include the wicked.  I suppose that we are
bound to give him credit for believing what he writes; but it is very
difficult for those to do so who read common English in the light of
common sense.  And still more difficult is it when the Catechism is read
in the light of the twenty-eighth Article, from which it was in all
probability constructed, and which says, ‘To such as rightly, worthily,
and with faith, receive the same, the bread which we break is a partaking
of the body of Christ.’  Can any reasonable man compare these passages,
and doubt for a moment that by the words ‘the faithful,’ are intended
those persons who ‘approach in faith whereby alone they can feed on
Christ.’
But there is another point in that same answer which claims our careful
consideration.  The words are, ‘which are received by the faithful in the
Lord’s Supper.’  It does not say, ‘in the Sacrament,’ for if it did it
might have been misunderstood.  In the use of the word ‘Sacrament’ there
is a risk of confusion, for it is employed in three different senses.  It
is sometimes employed to denote the whole act, or sacramental service, as
in Article xxv., where Sacraments are described as badges, witnesses, and
signs.  It is sometimes used to express the outward sign and the inward
gift, regarded as forming together one perfect whole, as in the third
question and answer of the Catechism, by which we are taught that there
are two parts in a Sacrament—the outward visible sign, and the inward
spiritual grace.  But sometimes it is used for the outward sign alone,
unaccompanied by the spiritual grace, as in Article xxix., where we read
that the wicked are in no wise partakers of Christ, ‘but rather to their
condemnation do eat and drink the sign, or Sacrament, of so great a
thing.’  It is my conviction that this looseness in the use of the word
‘Sacrament’ had led to great confusion; for when those who hold the great
doctrines of the Reformation have declared their belief in the presence
of their blessed Redeemer in the Sacrament, they have used the word in
the sense of the sacred feast, and expressed their assurance that He, a
living Lord, is present in the midst of His waiting people.  But others,
taking the word ‘Sacrament’ to mean simply the consecrated elements, may
quote such words from the staunchest reformers, as proving that even they
taught the presence of the Lord in the bread and wine.  Happily, in the
Catechism this danger is avoided, for in this important answer the word
‘Sacrament’ is not used at all.  The sacred feast is there called the
‘Lord’s Supper,’ respecting which there is no confusion, and the result
is that there is not even the misuse of a word to encourage the idea of
anything like a presence in the elements.

But if there were any room for doubt as to the meaning of the Church of
England in this passage, it would surely be removed by the next question
and answer, ‘What are the benefits whereof we are partakers thereby?’
‘The strengthening and refreshing of our souls by the body and blood of
Christ, as our bodies are by the bread and wine.’  It is difficult to
imagine language which could preserve the distinction of the outward and
the inward parts more clearly than this does.  The outward is for the
body, and strengthens it; the inward for the soul, and does the same for
it.  The one food is material for a material body; the other is
spiritual, for the spiritual sustenance of the soul.  The one is
external, to be received into the body by bodily organization; the other
is internal and invisible, received into the soul by faith.  To identify
the two, or to shut up the one within the other, is to violate the whole
principle of the passage; it is to confuse material and spiritual things,
and utterly to depart from the teaching of the Church of England by
giving a material character to the most spiritual act of which the soul
is capable.

The Communion Service.—But there is yet another most important
document, and one inexpressibly precious to the heart of every devout
communicant amongst us: I mean the Communion Service, or ‘Order of
Administration of the Lord’s Supper, or Holy Communion.’  How often have
those sacred prayers expressed the deep feeling of our inmost soul, as we
have knelt in holy faith before the Table of the Lord?  Now there cannot
be a moment’s doubt that we are taught in that most precious Service to
feed on the body and blood of our most blessed Saviour, and to expect
that the most sacred food will be given to the soul.  If this were not
expressed, the bread which we break would not be presented to us as a
partaking of the body of Christ.  But while we are taught in living faith
to partake of His most precious body and blood, the whole service has
been so carefully worded that the spiritual grace is never identified
with the outward sign.  As in the Articles and Catechism, the two things
are kept perfectly distinct.  In simply reading the Service as we now
have it, this care is not always apparent, for the language of devotion
is never the language of controversial theology, and the spirit of
fervent prayer does not admit of the expression of theological
distinctions.  Full hearts do not stop to define when they are pleading
before God.  But the utmost care was taken, and we profit from the
results.  This is easily seen by a comparison of the two Prayer Books of
Edward VI.  The Reformation was a gradual process, so that the Prayer
Book of 1549 is less distinct than that of 1552.  In the latter book
there were important changes made, and these changes indicate very
plainly the real teaching of our present Prayer Book.  In the Prayer Book
of 1549, there were some passages which might have been understood as
teaching that the most precious body and blood of our Lord was to be
received in the consecrated elements of bread and wine; but in the book
of 1552, these passages were all changed so as to render such a sense
impossible.

For example: in the exhortation to communicants, it was written in the
book of 1549, ‘He hath left in these holy mysteries, as a pledge of His
love, and a continual remembrance of the same, his own blessed body and
precious blood for us to feed upon spiritually to our endless comfort
and consolation.’  If the word ‘mysteries’ was understood of the
consecrated elements, this passage might have been understood as teaching
that the spiritual food was actually in the consecrated bread and wine.

So in 1552, the passage was changed to the well-known words, ‘He hath
instituted and ordained holy mysteries as pledges of His love, and
continual remembrance of His death, to our great and endless comfort,’
and all possibility of misapprehension was removed.

Again, in the prayer of consecration in 1549 we find the words, ‘Hear us,
O Merciful Father, we beseech thee; and with Thy Holy Spirit and Word
vouchsafe to bless and sanctify these Thy gifts and creatures of bread
and wine, that they may be unto us the body and blood of Thy most dearly
beloved Son Jesus Christ.’  These words might fairly be taken as praying
for a change in the elements, and therefore in the next version the
passage was completely changed, and the unmistakable language of our
present Prayer Book introduced in its stead: ‘Grant that we receiving
these Thy creatures of bread and wine, according to Thy Son our Saviour
Jesus Christ’s holy institution, in remembrance of His death and passion,
may be partakers of His most blessed body and blood.’
So in the prayer before consecration.  In the first book the words were,
‘Grant us, therefore, gracious Lord, so to eat the flesh of Thy dear Son
Jesus Christ, and to drink His blood in these Holy Mysteries.’  But
this was liable to the same danger as the passage in the exhortation
already referred to, and therefore the words, ‘In these holy mysteries,’
were struck out, and the prayer left as it now stands in our Prayer Book.

And so once more, in the words of administration in the first book there
was only the first portion of the present sentences.  The words were:
‘The body of our Lord Jesus Christ, which was given for thee, preserve
thy body and soul unto everlasting life.’  But though not necessary, it
was possible to understand this as if the bread presented to the
communicants were declared to be the body of our Lord Jesus Christ.  To
prevent this, the following words, ‘Take and eat this, and feed on Him
in thy heart by faith, with thanksgiving,’ were substituted in 1552, and
combined with the original form in 1559.  Nothing can be clearer, or more
important, than the teaching of this passage.  In it the distinction is
perfectly clear between the bread which we eat, and the blessed Saviour
on whom we feed.  Of the bread it says, ‘Eat this,’ this bread which I
put into your hand.  But of the inward and spiritual grace it says, ‘Feed
on Him,’ on the Lord Jesus Christ Himself; and this feeding is described
as the act of the heart through faith, for the words are, ‘Feed on
Him—in thine heart—through faith—with thanksgiving.’
Homilies.—But there is another rich mine of truth from which those who
are anxious to learn the mind of the Church of England may obtain most
abundant information.  I observe that as a general rule those who teach
the doctrine of the real presence in the elements refer very little to
the Homilies.  They treat them as if they were not aware of their
existence, and I am not surprised at their silence, for they certainly
can find nothing in them to support their system.  You may search the
Homilies from one end to the other, and you will find nothing there to
support the doctrine of a real presence of our Lord and Saviour in the
consecrated elements.  They are in perfect harmony with the Articles.

The definition of a Sacrament is the same, and preserves with equal
clearness the distinction between the outward sign and inward grace—as
e.g., in the ninth Homily of the second book, where we read the
following reference to the words of Augustine ‘He calleth Sacraments holy
signs, and . . . saith “if Sacraments have not a certain similitude of
these things whereof they be Sacraments, they should be no Sacraments at
all.  And of this similitude, they do for the most part receive the names
of the same things they signify.”  By these words of St. Augustine, it
appeareth that he allowed the common description of a Sacrament, which is
that it is a visible sign of an invisible grace, that is to say, that
setteth out to the eyes, and other outward senses, the inward working of
God’s free mercy, and doth as it were seal in our hearts the promises of
God.’
But I must be careful with reference to the Homilies, for there are two
passages which are sometimes quoted in order to show that the doctrine of
the real presence in the elements is the doctrine taught in them.  One of
these passages is quoted by Dr. Pusey in his book on the Real Presence,
viz., the Advertisement at the end of the First Book of Homilies:
‘Hereafter shall follow sermons of fasting, praying, almsdeeds, &c, of
the nativity, passion, resurrection, and ascension of our Saviour Christ;
of the due receiving of His blessed body and blood under the form of
bread and wine,’ &c.  Now I am quite prepared to admit that when this
Advertisement was written, the writer of it did believe that the body and
blood of our blessed Lord was present under the form of bread and wine;
but even the Advertisement was no part of any Homily, and can never be
regarded as having been at any time a portion of the authoritative
teaching of the Church of England.  I am willing, however, to admit that,
although not authoritative, it may be regarded as indicating what was the
opinion of the writers at the date of the First Book of Homilies.  All,
therefore, turns upon the date, and when I remember that the First Book
of Homilies was published in 1547, two years before the first revision of
the Communion Service, viz., that in 1549, and five years before the
second, viz., that in 1552, when the alterations to which I have
referred were made in the Communion Service; when, moreover, I find that
when the promised Homily was published, it was headed by a different
title, viz., ‘The worthy receiving, and reverend esteeming; of the
Sacrament of the body and blood of Christ;’ when, moreover, I find on its
first page the passage just quoted respecting the sign and thing
signified, I am altogether at a loss to understand how a person of the
learning of Dr. Pusey should have quoted the Advertisement, as if it were
the teaching of the Church of England in her Homilies.  He must have
known the date, and must have been perfectly acquainted with the changes
which took place five years after it.

But there is another passage sometimes quoted from the Homily, and quoted
with great assurance by those who desire to represent the Church of
England as teaching the doctrine of the real presence.  I once heard an
advanced Ritualist preaching on the subject, and with the utmost boldness
he challenged us to listen to the Homilies, and then he quoted the words,
‘Thus much we must be sure to hold, that in the supper of the Lord there
is no vain ceremony, no bare sign, no untrue figure of a thing absent,
but, as the Scripture saith, a marvellous incorporation.’  Oh! how did my
heart burn, as I sat in that church, to cry aloud from my seat ‘Read the
whole passage,’ but I was obliged to sit in silence, and endure.  Oh! how
I pity laymen, who have no power of contradiction, when they hear gross
error preached to themselves and their families!  But I may read it now:
‘The table of the Lord, the bread and cup of the Lord, the memory of
Christ, the annunciation of His death, yea, the communion of the body and
blood of the Lord’ (why was all that left out?), ‘In a marvellous
incorporation.’  Now what is the meaning of this marvellous
incorporation?  Does it mean the incorporation of our blessed Lord and
Saviour in the bread?  Or does it refer to the work of the Holy Ghost in
the soul?  Let the question be decided by the words which conclude the
sentence: ‘In a marvellous incorporation, which, by the operation of the
Holy Ghost—the very bond of our conjunction with Christ—is through faith
wrought in the souls of the faithful.’
But that is not all.  The Homilies were written by men deeply impressed
by the truth of God: by men who loved the Gospel, and who earnestly
desired to see others partakers of their joy.  So they did not merely
speak in the language of accurate theology, but they appealed to souls
with the fervour of loving hearts.  Let us listen, in conclusion, to the
glowing words with which they wind up the first part of their address,
‘It is well known that the meat we seek for in this supper is spiritual
food; the nourishment of our soul; a heavenly refection and not an
earthly; an invisible meal and not bodily; a ghostly substance and not
carnal; so that to think that without faith we may enjoy the eating and
drinking thereof, or that that is the fruition of it, is but to dream a
gross carnal feeding, basely objecting and binding ourselves to the
elements and creatures.’ . . . ‘That when thou goest up to the reverend
Communion to be satisfied with spiritual meats, thou look up with faith
upon the holy body of thy God, thou marvel with reverence, thou touch it
with the mind, thou receive it with the hand of thy heart, and thou take
it fully with thy inward man.  Thus we see, beloved, that resorting to
this table, we must pluck up all the roots of infidelity, all distrust in
God’s promises, that we make ourselves living members of Christ’s body.

For the unbelievers and faithless cannot feed upon that precious body.

Whereas the faithful have their life, their abiding in Him, their union,
and, as it were, their incorporation with Him.  Wherefore let us prove,
and try ourselves unfeignedly without flattering ourselves, whether we be
plants of that fruitful olive, living branches of the true vine, members
indeed of Christ’s mystical body, whether God hath purified our hearts by
faith, to the sincere acknowledging of His Gospel, and embracing of His
mercies in Christ Jesus, so that at this, His table, we receive, not only
the outward Sacrament, but the spiritual thing also; not the figure, but
the truth; not the shadow only, but the body; not to death, but to life;
not to destruction, but to salvation; which God grant us to do through
the merits of our Lord and Saviour: to whom be all honour and glory for
ever.  Amen.’


CHAPTER: V


A few days after this, Virginia and her curly-haired cavalier went out
riding on Brockley meadows, where she tore her habit so badly in getting
through a hedge that, on their return home, she made up her mind to go
up by the back staircase so as not to be seen. As she was running past
the Tapestry Chamber, the door of which happened to be open, she fancied
she saw some one inside, and thinking it was her mother's maid, who
sometimes used to bring her work there, looked in to ask her to mend
her habit. To her immense surprise, however, it was the Canterville
Ghost himself! He was sitting by the window, watching the ruined gold of
the yellowing trees fly through the air, and the red leaves dancing
madly down the long avenue. His head was leaning on his hand, and his
whole attitude was one of extreme depression. Indeed, so forlorn, and so
much out of repair did he look, that little Virginia, whose first idea
had been to run away and lock herself in her room, was filled with pity,
and determined to try and comfort him. So light was her footfall, and so
deep his melancholy, that he was not aware of her presence till she
spoke to him.

"I am so sorry for you," she said, "but my brothers are going back to
Eton to-morrow, and then, if you behave yourself, no one will annoy
you."

"It is absurd asking me to behave myself," he answered, looking round in
astonishment at the pretty little girl who had ventured to address him,
"quite absurd. I must rattle my chains, and groan through keyholes, and
walk about at night, if that is what you mean. It is my only reason for
existing."

"It is no reason at all for existing, and you know you have been very
wicked. Mrs. Umney told us, the first day we arrived here, that you had
killed your wife."

"Well, I quite admit it," said the Ghost, petulantly, "but it was a
purely family matter, and concerned no one else."

"It is very wrong to kill any one," said Virginia, who at times had a
sweet puritan gravity, caught from some old New England ancestor.

"Oh, I hate the cheap severity of abstract ethics! My wife was very
plain, never had my ruffs properly starched, and knew nothing about
cookery. Why, there was a buck I had shot in Hogley Woods, a magnificent
pricket, and do you know how she had it sent to table? However, it is
no matter now, for it is all over, and I don't think it was very nice of
her brothers to starve me to death, though I did kill her."

"Starve you to death? Oh, Mr. Ghost--I mean Sir Simon, are you hungry? I
have a sandwich in my case. Would you like it?"

"No, thank you, I never eat anything now; but it is very kind of you,
all the same, and you are much nicer than the rest of your horrid, rude,
vulgar, dishonest family."

"Stop!" cried Virginia, stamping her foot, "it is you who are rude, and
horrid, and vulgar, and as for dishonesty, you know you stole the
paints out of my box to try and furbish up that ridiculous blood-stain
in the library. First you took all my reds, including the vermilion, and
I couldn't do any more sunsets, then you took the emerald-green and the
chrome-yellow, and finally I had nothing left but indigo and Chinese
white, and could only do moonlight scenes, which are always depressing
to look at, and not at all easy to paint. I never told on you, though I
was very much annoyed, and it was most ridiculous, the whole thing; for
who ever heard of emerald-green blood?"

"Well, really," said the Ghost, rather meekly, "what was I to do? It is
a very difficult thing to get real blood nowadays, and, as your brother
began it all with his Paragon Detergent, I certainly saw no reason why I
should not have your paints. As for colour, that is always a matter of
taste: the Cantervilles have blue blood, for instance, the very bluest
in England; but I know you Americans don't care for things of this
kind."

"You know nothing about it, and the best thing you can do is to emigrate
and improve your mind. My father will be only too happy to give you a
free passage, and though there is a heavy duty on spirits of every kind,
there will be no difficulty about the Custom House, as the officers are
all Democrats. Once in New York, you are sure to be a great success. I
know lots of people there who would give a hundred thousand dollars to
have a grandfather, and much more than that to have a family ghost."

"I don't think I should like America."

"I suppose because we have no ruins and no curiosities," said Virginia,
satirically.

"No ruins! no curiosities!" answered the Ghost; "you have your navy and
your manners."

"Good evening; I will go and ask papa to get the twins an extra week's
holiday."

"Please don't go, Miss Virginia," he cried; "I am so lonely and so
unhappy, and I really don't know what to do. I want to go to sleep and I
cannot."

"That's quite absurd! You have merely to go to bed and blow out the
candle. It is very difficult sometimes to keep awake, especially at
church, but there is no difficulty at all about sleeping. Why, even
babies know how to do that, and they are not very clever."

"I have not slept for three hundred years," he said sadly, and
Virginia's beautiful blue eyes opened in wonder; "for three hundred
years I have not slept, and I am so tired."

Virginia grew quite grave, and her little lips trembled like
rose-leaves. She came towards him, and kneeling down at his side, looked
up into his old withered face.

"Poor, poor Ghost," she murmured; "have you no place where you can
sleep?"

"Far away beyond the pine-woods," he answered, in a low, dreamy voice,
"there is a little garden. There the grass grows long and deep, there
are the great white stars of the hemlock flower, there the nightingale
sings all night long. All night long he sings, and the cold crystal
moon looks down, and the yew-tree spreads out its giant arms over the
sleepers."

Virginia's eyes grew dim with tears, and she hid her face in her hands.

"You mean the Garden of Death," she whispered.

"Yes, death. Death must be so beautiful. To lie in the soft brown earth,
with the grasses waving above one's head, and listen to silence. To have
no yesterday, and no to-morrow. To forget time, to forget life, to be at
peace. You can help me. You can open for me the portals of death's
house, for love is always with you, and love is stronger than death
is."

Virginia trembled, a cold shudder ran through her, and for a few moments
there was silence. She felt as if she was in a terrible dream.

Then the ghost spoke again, and his voice sounded like the sighing of
the wind.

"Have you ever read the old prophecy on the library window?"

"Oh, often," cried the little girl, looking up; "I know it quite well.

It is painted in curious black letters, and is difficult to read. There
are only six lines:
    "'When a golden girl can win
    Prayer from out the lips of sin,
    When the barren almond bears,
    And a little child gives away its tears,
    Then shall all the house be still
    And peace come to Canterville.'

"But I don't know what they mean."

"They mean," he said, sadly, "that you must weep with me for my sins,
because I have no tears, and pray with me for my soul, because I have no
faith, and then, if you have always been sweet, and good, and gentle,
the angel of death will have mercy on me. You will see fearful shapes in
darkness, and wicked voices will whisper in your ear, but they will not
harm you, for against the purity of a little child the powers of Hell
cannot prevail."

Virginia made no answer, and the ghost wrung his hands in wild despair
as he looked down at her bowed golden head. Suddenly she stood up, very
pale, and with a strange light in her eyes. "I am not afraid," she said
firmly, "and I will ask the angel to have mercy on you."

He rose from his seat with a faint cry of joy, and taking her hand bent
over it with old-fashioned grace and kissed it. His fingers were as cold
as ice, and his lips burned like fire, but Virginia did not falter, as
he led her across the dusky room. On the faded green tapestry were
broidered little huntsmen. They blew their tasselled horns and with
their tiny hands waved to her to go back. "Go back! little Virginia,"

they cried, "go back!" but the ghost clutched her hand more tightly,
and she shut her eyes against them. Horrible animals with lizard tails
and goggle eyes blinked at her from the carven chimneypiece, and
murmured, "Beware! little Virginia, beware! we may never see you again,"

but the Ghost glided on more swiftly, and Virginia did not listen. When
they reached the end of the room he stopped, and muttered some words she
could not understand. She opened her eyes, and saw the wall slowly
fading away like a mist, and a great black cavern in front of her. A
bitter cold wind swept round them, and she felt something pulling at her
dress. "Quick, quick," cried the Ghost, "or it will be too late," and
in a moment the wainscoting had closed behind them, and the Tapestry
Chamber was empty.


CHAPTER: THE END


The death of the Pompadour robbed Boucher of a friend; but her
brother, Marigny, remained faithfully attached to the old artist, and
seized every chance to honour him. On the death of Carle van Loo,
Boucher, at sixty-two, was made first painter to the king, with all
his pensions and privileges that were consistent with this the supreme
appointment in the art world.

There had been serious intention of making Boucher the head of the
Ecole des Elèves Protegés; he had the art of making himself liked and
of inspiring the love of the arts. He was very popular with the
students and artists, owing to his kindliness, his eagerness to render
service, his readiness to encourage the youngsters or to console them.

When the riot took place, provoked by the Academicians by their award
of the Prix de Rome in 1767, the students insulted the Academicians,
but hailed Boucher with enthusiastic applause. The reason was not far
to seek. When a student came to the old master for advice he did not
"play the pontiff," and, scorning the false dignity of big phrases, he
took the brush in his hand and showed the way out of all difficulties
by simplehearted example, despising rules, and putting himself out in
order to make things clear to a young artist.

However, the Academicians feared he would be an unorthodox master for
youth, and appointed another in his place.

A long and serious illness thwarted his keen energies. Diderot was
giving himself up to outrageous violence against him. If the old
painter exhibited at the Salon, Diderot fiercely assailed his art; if
he did not exhibit, Diderot as bitterly assailed him for his
negligences. Above all, he attacked Boucher in that he did not paint
what Diderot would have painted--but could not. "When he paints
infants," cries Diderot, "you will not find one employed in a real act
of life--studying his lesson, reading, writing, stripping hemp."

Poor unfortunate infants! for whom Philosophy could find no happier
joy in life than stripping hemp! Boucher was but an artist. He
painted his generation as far as he could see it, and, with all his
faults and weaknesses, he never debauched his art with foreign and
alien things that had no part in the nation's life; he painted fair
France into his landscapes, not a make-believe land he did not know
with preposterous Greek ruins; and best of all, to his eternal honour,
he painted infants glad in their gladness to be alive, with no desire
to send their happy little bodies to school, with no sickly ambition
to make them into budding philosophers, with no thought of making them
pose and lie as Men of Feeling. He had no joy in setting their little
bodies to toil--in making them "teach a lesson to the spectator," in
making them stoop their little shoulders to the "picking of hemp."

He continued to paint as he had always painted--except that he painted
less well. The wreath of roses was wilting on a grey head. The blood
jigged less warmly in the frail body. The features showed pallid--the
eyes haggard. The sight failed. The hand alone kept something of its
cunning.

He went to Holland with his friend Randon du Boisset, but health
shrank farther from him. Diderot had near spent his last jibe.

In 1768, Boucher's sixty-fifth year, the neglected queen went to her
grave. The king's grief and contrition and vows to amend his life came
too late, and lasted little longer than the drying of the floods of
tears over the body of his dead consort. A year later he was become
the creature of a pretty woman of the gutters, whom he caused to be
married to the Count du Barry--the infamously famous Madame du Barry.

But neither the remonstrances of Choiseul with the king against this
further degradation of the throne of France, nor his unconcealed scorn
of the upstart countess, nor the dangerous enemy he made for himself
thereby, signified now to Boucher, first painter to the king.

Boucher was failing. His son was a prig and a disappointment. His two
favourite pupils, Baudoin and Deshayes, who had married his two girls,
died.

To the Salon of 1769 he sent his "Caravan of Bohemians." It was his
last display. He had been going about for some time like a gaunt ghost
of his former self, afflicted with all the ills inevitable to a life
feverishly consumed in work and the pursuit of pleasure.

They went to his studio at five of the clock one May morning, and
found him seated at his easel, before a canvas of Venus, dead, with
the paint-filled brush fallen out of his fingers.

So passed he away on the 30th of May 1770, in his sixty-seventh year.

When Boucher died, the generation of which he was the limner was near
come to its violent end. The rosy carnivals and gay gallantries of his
age gave way to the blood-stained romance and fierce tempest of the
Revolution. The garrets of the old curiosity-shops received the
discarded canvases of the master. His shepherds and shepherdesses were
put to rout by the Romans of his pupil, citizen David. The old order
was brought into contempt and overthrown. And with it, Boucher's art,
like much that was gracious and charming and good in the evil thing,
went down also, and was overwhelmed for a while.

For a while only. For just as, out of the blood and terror of the
Revolution, a real France arose, phnix-wise, from the ruin, and in
being born, whilst putting off the vilenesses of the thing from which
she sprang, took on also to herself the gracious and winsome qualities
that place her amongst the most fascinating peoples of the ages; so
Boucher has come into his kingdom again--the most gracious of painters
that the years have yielded.


CHAPTER: CHAPTER IV.


Every year, the day he walked back from the great graveyard, he went to
church as he had done the day his idea was born.  It was on this
occasion, as it happened, after a year had passed, that he began to
observe his altar to be haunted by a worshipper at least as frequent as
himself.  Others of the faithful, and in the rest of the church, came and
went, appealing sometimes, when they disappeared, to a vague or to a
particular recognition; but this unfailing presence was always to be
observed when he arrived and still in possession when he departed.  He
was surprised, the first time, at the promptitude with which it assumed
an identity for him—the identity of the lady whom two years before, on
his anniversary, he had seen so intensely bowed, and of whose tragic face
he had had so flitting a vision.  Given the time that had passed, his
recollection of her was fresh enough to make him wonder.  Of himself she
had of course no impression, or rather had had none at first: the time
came when her manner of transacting her business suggested her having
gradually guessed his call to be of the same order.  She used his altar
for her own purpose—he could only hope that sad and solitary as she
always struck him, she used it for her own Dead.  There were
interruptions, infidelities, all on his part, calls to other associations
and duties; but as the months went on he found her whenever he returned,
and he ended by taking pleasure in the thought that he had given her
almost the contentment he had given himself.  They worshipped side by
side so often that there were moments when he wished he might be sure, so
straight did their prospect stretch away of growing old together in their
rites.  She was younger than he, but she looked as if her Dead were at
least as numerous as his candles.  She had no colour, no sound, no fault,
and another of the things about which he had made up his mind was that
she had no fortune.  Always black-robed, she must have had a succession
of sorrows.  People weren’t poor, after all, whom so many losses could
overtake; they were positively rich when they had had so much to give up.
But the air of this devoted and indifferent woman, who always made, in
any attitude, a beautiful accidental line, conveyed somehow to Stransom
that she had known more kinds of trouble than one.

He had a great love of music and little time for the joy of it; but
occasionally, when workaday noises were muffled by Saturday afternoons,
it used to come back to him that there were glories.  There were moreover
friends who reminded him of this and side by side with whom he found
himself sitting out concerts.  On one of these winter afternoons, in St.
James’s Hall, he became aware after he had seated himself that the lady
he had so often seen at church was in the place next him and was
evidently alone, as he also this time happened to be.  She was at first
too absorbed in the consideration of the programme to heed him, but when
she at last glanced at him he took advantage of the movement to speak to
her, greeting her with the remark that he felt as if he already knew her.
She smiled as she said “Oh yes, I recognise you”; yet in spite of this
admission of long acquaintance it was the first he had seen of her smile.
The effect of it was suddenly to contribute more to that acquaintance
than all the previous meetings had done.  He hadn’t “taken in,” he said
to himself, that she was so pretty.  Later, that evening—it was while he
rolled along in a hansom on his way to dine out—he added that he hadn’t
taken in that she was so interesting.  The next morning in the midst of
his work he quite suddenly and irrelevantly reflected that his impression
of her, beginning so far back, was like a winding river that had at last
reached the sea.

His work in fact was blurred a little all that day by the sense of what
had now passed between them.  It wasn’t much, but it had just made the
difference.  They had listened together to Beethoven and Schumann; they
had talked in the pauses, and at the end, when at the door, to which they
moved together, he had asked her if he could help her in the matter of
getting away.  She had thanked him and put up her umbrella, slipping into
the crowd without an allusion to their meeting yet again and leaving him
to remember at leisure that not a word had been exchanged about the usual
scene of that coincidence.  This omission struck him now as natural and
then again as perverse.  She mightn’t in the least have allowed his
warrant for speaking to her, and yet if she hadn’t he would have judged
her an underbred woman.  It was odd that when nothing had really ever
brought them together he should have been able successfully to assume
they were in a manner old friends—that this negative quantity was somehow
more than they could express.  His success, it was true, had been
qualified by her quick escape, so that there grew up in him an absurd
desire to put it to some better test.  Save in so far as some other poor
chance might help him, such a test could be only to meet her afresh at
church.  Left to himself he would have gone to church the very next
afternoon, just for the curiosity of seeing if he should find her there.
But he wasn’t left to himself, a fact he discovered quite at the last,
after he had virtually made up his mind to go.  The influence that kept
him away really revealed to him how little to himself his Dead _ever_
left him.  He went only for _them_—for nothing else in the world.

The force of this revulsion kept him away ten days: he hated to connect
the place with anything but his offices or to give a glimpse of the
curiosity that had been on the point of moving him.  It was absurd to
weave a tangle about a matter so simple as a custom of devotion that
might with ease have been daily or hourly; yet the tangle got itself
woven.  He was sorry, he was disappointed: it was as if a long happy
spell had been broken and he had lost a familiar security.  At the last,
however, he asked himself if he was to stay away for ever from the fear
of this muddle about motives.  After an interval neither longer nor
shorter than usual he re-entered the church with a clear conviction that
he should scarcely heed the presence or the absence of the lady of the
concert.  This indifference didn’t prevent his at once noting that for
the only time since he had first seen her she wasn’t on the spot.  He had
now no scruple about giving her time to arrive, but she didn’t arrive,
and when he went away still missing her he was profanely and consentingly
sorry.  If her absence made the tangle more intricate, that was all her
own doing.  By the end of another year it was very intricate indeed; but
by that time he didn’t in the least care, and it was only his cultivated
consciousness that had given him scruples.  Three times in three months
he had gone to church without finding her, and he felt he hadn’t needed
these occasions to show him his suspense had dropped.  Yet it was,
incongruously, not indifference, but a refinement of delicacy that had
kept him from asking the sacristan, who would of course immediately have
recognised his description of her, whether she had been seen at other
hours.  His delicacy had kept him from asking any question about her at
any time, and it was exactly the same virtue that had left him so free to
be decently civil to her at the concert.

This happy advantage now served him anew, enabling him when she finally
met his eyes—it was after a fourth trial—to predetermine quite fixedly
his awaiting her retreat.  He joined her in the street as soon as she had
moved, asking her if he might accompany her a certain distance.  With her
placid permission he went as far as a house in the neighbourhood at which
she had business: she let him know it was not where she lived.  She
lived, as she said, in a mere slum, with an old aunt, a person in
connexion with whom she spoke of the engrossment of humdrum duties and
regular occupations.  She wasn’t, the mourning niece, in her first youth,
and her vanished freshness had left something behind that, for Stransom,
represented the proof it had been tragically sacrificed.  Whatever she
gave him the assurance of she gave without references.  She might have
been a divorced duchess—she might have been an old maid who taught the
harp.


CHAPTER: CHAPTER V.


They fell at last into the way of walking together almost every time they
met, though for a long time still they never met but at church.  He
couldn’t ask her to come and see him, and as if she hadn’t a proper place
to receive him she never invited her friend.  As much as himself she knew
the world of London, but from an undiscussed instinct of privacy they
haunted the region not mapped on the social chart.  On the return she
always made him leave her at the same corner.  She looked with him, as a
pretext for a pause, at the depressed things in suburban shop-fronts; and
there was never a word he had said to her that she hadn’t beautifully
understood.  For long ages he never knew her name, any more than she had
ever pronounced his own; but it was not their names that mattered, it was
only their perfect practice and their common need.

These things made their whole relation so impersonal that they hadn’t the
rules or reasons people found in ordinary friendships.  They didn’t care
for the things it was supposed necessary to care for in the intercourse
of the world.  They ended one day—they never knew which of them expressed
it first—by throwing out the idea that they didn’t care for each other.
Over this idea they grew quite intimate; they rallied to it in a way that
marked a fresh start in their confidence.  If to feel deeply together
about certain things wholly distinct from themselves didn’t constitute a
safety, where was safety to be looked for?  Not lightly nor often, not
without occasion nor without emotion, any more than in any other
reference by serious people to a mystery of their faith; but when
something had happened to warm, as it were, the air for it, they came as
near as they could come to calling their Dead by name.  They felt it was
coming very near to utter their thought at all.  The word “they”
expressed enough; it limited the mention, it had a dignity of its own,
and if, in their talk, you had heard our friends use it, you might have
taken them for a pair of pagans of old alluding decently to the
domesticated gods.  They never knew—at least Stransom never knew—how they
had learned to be sure about each other.  If it had been with each a
question of what the other was there for, the certitude had come in some
fine way of its own.  Any faith, after all, has the instinct of
propagation, and it was as natural as it was beautiful that they should
have taken pleasure on the spot in the imagination of a following.  If
the following was for each but a following of one it had proved in the
event sufficient.  Her debt, however, of course was much greater than
his, because while she had only given him a worshipper he had given her a
splendid temple.  Once she said she pitied him for the length of his
list—she had counted his candles almost as often as himself—and this made
him wonder what could have been the length of hers.  He had wondered
before at the coincidence of their losses, especially as from time to
time a new candle was set up.  On some occasion some accident led him to
express this curiosity, and she answered as if in surprise that he hadn’t
already understood.  “Oh for me, you know, the more there are the
better—there could never be too many.  I should like hundreds and
hundreds—I should like thousands; I should like a great mountain of
light.”

Then of course in a flash he understood.  “Your Dead are only One?”

She hung back at this as never yet.  “Only One,” she answered, colouring
as if now he knew her guarded secret.  It really made him feel he knew
less than before, so difficult was it for him to reconstitute a life in
which a single experience had so belittled all others.  His own life,
round its central hollow, had been packed close enough.  After this she
appeared to have regretted her confession, though at the moment she spoke
there had been pride in her very embarrassment.  She declared to him that
his own was the larger, the dearer possession—the portion one would have
chosen if one had been able to choose; she assured him she could
perfectly imagine some of the echoes with which his silences were
peopled.  He knew she couldn’t: one’s relation to what one had loved and
hated had been a relation too distinct from the relations of others.  But
this didn’t affect the fact that they were growing old together in their
piety.  She was a feature of that piety, but even at the ripe stage of
acquaintance in which they occasionally arranged to meet at a concert or
to go together to an exhibition she was not a feature of anything else.
The most that happened was that his worship became paramount.  Friend by
friend dropped away till at last there were more emblems on his altar
than houses left him to enter.  She was more than any other the friend
who remained, but she was unknown to all the rest.  Once when she had
discovered, as they called it, a new star, she used the expression that
the chapel at last was full.

“Oh no,” Stransom replied, “there is a great thing wanting for that!  The
chapel will never be full till a candle is set up before which all the
others will pale.  It will be the tallest candle of all.”

Her mild wonder rested on him.  “What candle do you mean?”

“I mean, dear lady, my own.”

He had learned after a long time that she earned money by her pen,
writing under a pseudonym she never disclosed in magazines he never saw.
She knew too well what he couldn’t read and what she couldn’t write, and
she taught him to cultivate indifference with a success that did much for
their good relations.  Her invisible industry was a convenience to him;
it helped his contented thought of her, the thought that rested in the
dignity of her proud obscure life, her little remunerated art and her
little impenetrable home.  Lost, with her decayed relative, in her dim
suburban world, she came to the surface for him in distant places.  She
was really the priestess of his altar, and whenever he quitted England he
committed it to her keeping.  She proved to him afresh that women have
more of the spirit of religion than men; he felt his fidelity pale and
faint in comparison with hers.  He often said to her that since he had so
little time to live he rejoiced in her having so much; so glad was he to
think she would guard the temple when he should have been called.  He had
a great plan for that, which of course he told her too, a bequest of
money to keep it up in undiminished state.  Of the administration of this
fund he would appoint her superintendent, and if the spirit should move
her she might kindle a taper even for him.

“And who will kindle one even for me?” she then seriously asked.


CHAPTER: CHAPTER VI.


She was always in mourning, yet the day he came back from the longest
absence he had yet made her appearance immediately told him she had
lately had a bereavement.  They met on this occasion as she was leaving
the church, so that postponing his own entrance he instantly offered to
turn round and walk away with her.  She considered, then she said: “Go in
now, but come and see me in an hour.”  He knew the small vista of her
street, closed at the end and as dreary as an empty pocket, where the
pairs of shabby little houses, semi-detached but indissolubly united,
were like married couples on bad terms.  Often, however, as he had gone
to the beginning he had never gone beyond.  Her aunt was dead—that he
immediately guessed, as well as that it made a difference; but when she
had for the first time mentioned her number he found himself, on her
leaving him, not a little agitated by this sudden liberality.  She wasn’t
a person with whom, after all, one got on so very fast: it had taken him
months and months to learn her name, years and years to learn her
address.  If she had looked, on this reunion, so much older to him, how
in the world did he look to her?  She had reached the period of life he
had long since reached, when, after separations, the marked clock-face of
the friend we meet announces the hour we have tried to forget.  He
couldn’t have said what he expected as, at the end of his waiting, he
turned the corner where for years he had always paused; simply not to
pause was a efficient cause for emotion.  It was an event, somehow; and
in all their long acquaintance there had never been an event.  This one
grew larger when, five minutes later, in the faint elegance of her little
drawing-room, she quavered out a greeting that showed the measure she
took of it.  He had a strange sense of having come for something in
particular; strange because literally there was nothing particular
between them, nothing save that they were at one on their great point,
which had long ago become a magnificent matter of course.  It was true
that after she had said “You can always come now, you know,” the thing he
was there for seemed already to have happened.  He asked her if it was
the death of her aunt that made the difference; to which she replied:
“She never knew I knew you.  I wished her not to.”  The beautiful
clearness of her candour—her faded beauty was like a summer
twilight—disconnected the words from any image of deceit.  They might
have struck him as the record of a deep dissimulation; but she had always
given him a sense of noble reasons.  The vanished aunt was present, as he
looked about him, in the small complacencies of the room, the beaded
velvet and the fluted moreen; and though, as we know, he had the worship
of the Dead, he found himself not definitely regretting this lady.  If
she wasn’t in his long list, however, she was in her niece’s short one,
and Stransom presently observed to the latter that now at least, in the
place they haunted together, she would have another object of devotion.

“Yes, I shall have another.  She was very kind to me.  It’s that that’s
the difference.”

He judged, wondering a good deal before he made any motion to leave her,
that the difference would somehow be very great and would consist of
still other things than her having let him come in.  It rather chilled
him, for they had been happy together as they were.  He extracted from
her at any rate an intimation that she should now have means less
limited, that her aunt’s tiny fortune had come to her, so that there was
henceforth only one to consume what had formerly been made to suffice for
two.  This was a joy to Stransom, because it had hitherto been equally
impossible for him either to offer her presents or contentedly to stay
his hand.  It was too ugly to be at her side that way, abounding himself
and yet not able to overflow—a demonstration that would have been
signally a false note.  Even her better situation too seemed only to draw
out in a sense the loneliness of her future.  It would merely help her to
live more and more for their small ceremonial, and this at a time when he
himself had begun wearily to feel that, having set it in motion, he might
depart.  When they had sat a while in the pale parlour she got up—“This
isn’t my room: let us go into mine.”  They had only to cross the narrow
hall, as he found, to pass quite into another air.  When she had closed
the door of the second room, as she called it, he felt at last in real
possession of her.  The place had the flush of life—it was expressive;
its dark red walls were articulate with memories and relics.  These were
simple things—photographs and water-colours, scraps of writing framed and
ghosts of flowers embalmed; but a moment sufficed to show him they had a
common meaning.  It was here she had lived and worked, and she had
already told him she would make no change of scene.  He read the
reference in the objects about her—the general one to places and times;
but after a minute he distinguished among them a small portrait of a
gentleman.  At a distance and without their glasses his eyes were only so
caught by it as to feel a vague curiosity.  Presently this impulse
carried him nearer, and in another moment he was staring at the picture
in stupefaction and with the sense that some sound had broken from him.
He was further conscious that he showed his companion a white face when
he turned round on her gasping: “Acton Hague!”

She matched his great wonder.  “Did you know him?”

“He was the friend of all my youth—of my early manhood.  And _you_ knew
him?”

She coloured at this and for a moment her answer failed; her eyes
embraced everything in the place, and a strange irony reached her lips as
she echoed: “Knew him?”

Then Stransom understood, while the room heaved like the cabin of a ship,
that its whole contents cried out with him, that it was a museum in his
honour, that all her later years had been addressed to him and that the
shrine he himself had reared had been passionately converted to this use.
It was all for Acton Hague that she had kneeled every day at his altar.
What need had there been for a consecrated candle when he was present in
the whole array? The revelation so smote our friend in the face that he
dropped into a seat and sat silent.  He had quickly felt her shaken by
the force of his shock, but as she sank on the sofa beside him and laid
her hand on his arm he knew almost as soon that she mightn’t resent it as
much as she’d have liked.


CHAPTER: CHAPTER VII.


He learned in that instant two things: one being that even in so long a
time she had gathered no knowledge of his great intimacy and his great
quarrel; the other that in spite of this ignorance, strangely enough, she
supplied on the spot a reason for his stupor.  “How extraordinary,” he
presently exclaimed, “that we should never have known!”

She gave a wan smile which seemed to Stransom stranger even than the fact
itself.  “I never, never spoke of him.”

He looked again about the room.  “Why then, if your life had been so full
of him?”

“Mayn’t I put you that question as well?  Hadn’t your life also been full
of him?”

“Any one’s, every one’s life who had the wonderful experience of knowing
him.  _I_ never spoke of him,” Stransom added in a moment, “because he
did me—years ago—an unforgettable wrong.”  She was silent, and with the
full effect of his presence all about them it almost startled her guest
to hear no protest escape her.  She accepted his words, he turned his
eyes to her again to see in what manner she accepted them.  It was with
rising tears and a rare sweetness in the movement of putting out her hand
to take his own.  Nothing more wonderful had ever appeared to him than,
in that little chamber of remembrance and homage, to see her convey with
such exquisite mildness that as from Acton Hague any injury was credible.
The clock ticked in the stillness—Hague had probably given it to her—and
while he let her hold his hand with a tenderness that was almost an
assumption of responsibility for his old pain as well as his new,
Stransom after a minute broke out: “Good God, how he must have used
_you_!”

She dropped his hand at this, got up and, moving across the room, made
straight a small picture to which, on examining it, he had given a slight
push.  Then turning round on him with her pale gaiety recovered, “I’ve
forgiven him!” she declared.

“I know what you’ve done,” said Stransom “I know what you’ve done for
years.”  For a moment they looked at each other through it all with their
long community of service in their eyes.  This short passage made, to his
sense, for the woman before him, an immense, an absolutely naked
confession; which was presently, suddenly blushing red and changing her
place again, what she appeared to learn he perceived in it.  He got up
and “How you must have loved him!” he cried.

“Women aren’t like men.  They can love even where they’ve suffered.”

“Women are wonderful,” said Stransom.  “But I assure you I’ve forgiven
him too.”

“If I had known of anything so strange I wouldn’t have brought you here.”

“So that we might have gone on in our ignorance to the last?”

“What do you call the last?” she asked, smiling still.

At this he could smile back at her.  “You’ll see—when it comes.”

She thought of that.  “This is better perhaps; but as we were—it was
good.”

He put her the question.  “Did it never happen that he spoke of me?”

Considering more intently she made no answer, and he then knew he should
have been adequately answered by her asking how often he himself had
spoken of their terrible friend.  Suddenly a brighter light broke in her
face and an excited idea sprang to her lips in the appeal: “You _have_
forgiven him?”

“How, if I hadn’t, could I linger here?”

She visibly winced at the deep but unintended irony of this; but even
while she did so she panted quickly: “Then in the lights on your altar—?”

“There’s never a light for Acton Hague!”

She stared with a dreadful fall, “But if he’s one of your Dead?”

“He’s one of the world’s, if you like—he’s one of yours.  But he’s not
one of mine.  Mine are only the Dead who died possessed of me.  They’re
mine in death because they were mine in life.”

“_He _was yours in life then, even if for a while he ceased to be.  If
you forgave him you went back to him.  Those whom we’ve once loved—”

“Are those who can hurt us most,” Stransom broke in.

“Ah it’s not true—you’ve _not_ forgiven him!” she wailed with a passion
that startled him.

He looked at her as never yet.  “What was it he did to you?”

“Everything!”  Then abruptly she put out her hand in farewell.
“Good-bye.”

He turned as cold as he had turned that night he read the man’s death.
“You mean that we meet no more?”

“Not as we’ve met—not _there_!”

He stood aghast at this snap of their great bond, at the renouncement
that rang out in the word she so expressively sounded.  “But what’s
changed—for you?”

She waited in all the sharpness of a trouble that for the first time
since he had known her made her splendidly stern.  “How can you
understand now when you didn’t understand before?”

“I didn’t understand before only because I didn’t know.  Now that I know,
I see what I’ve been living with for years,” Stransom went on very
gently.

She looked at him with a larger allowance, doing this gentleness justice.
“How can I then, on this new knowledge of my own, ask you to continue to
live with it?”

“I set up my altar, with its multiplied meanings,” Stransom began; but
she quietly interrupted him.

“You set up your altar, and when I wanted one most I found it
magnificently ready.  I used it with the gratitude I’ve always shown you,
for I knew it from of old to be dedicated to Death.  I told you long ago
that my Dead weren’t many.  Yours were, but all you had done for them was
none too much for _my_ worship!  You had placed a great light for Each—I
gathered them together for One!”

“We had simply different intentions,” he returned.  “That, as you say, I
perfectly knew, and I don’t see why your intention shouldn’t still
sustain you.”

“That’s because you’re generous—you can imagine and think.  But the spell
is broken.”

It seemed to poor Stransom, in spite of his resistance, that it really
was, and the prospect stretched grey and void before him.  All he could
say, however, was: “I hope you’ll try before you give up.”

“If I had known you had ever known him I should have taken for granted he
had his candle,” she presently answered.  “What’s changed, as you say, is
that on making the discovery I find he never has had it.  That makes _my_
attitude”—she paused as thinking how to express it, then said simply—“all
wrong.”

“Come once again,” he pleaded.

“Will you give him his candle?” she asked.

He waited, but only because it would sound ungracious; not because of a
doubt of his feeling.  “I can’t do that!” he declared at last.

“Then good-bye.”  And she gave him her hand again.

He had got his dismissal; besides which, in the agitation of everything
that had opened out to him, he felt the need to recover himself as he
could only do in solitude.  Yet he lingered—lingered to see if she had no
compromise to express, no attenuation to propose.  But he only met her
great lamenting eyes, in which indeed he read that she was as sorry for
him as for any one else.  This made him say: “At least, in any case, I
may see you here.”

“Oh yes, come if you like.  But I don’t think it will do.”

He looked round the room once more, knowing how little he was sure it
would do.  He felt also stricken and more and more cold, and his chill
was like an ague in which he had to make an effort not to shake.  Then he
made doleful reply: “I must try on my side—if you can’t try on yours.”
She came out with him to the hall and into the doorway, and here he put
her the question he held he could least answer from his own wit.  “Why
have you never let me come before?”

“Because my aunt would have seen you, and I should have had to tell her
how I came to know you.”

“And what would have been the objection to that?”

“It would have entailed other explanations; there would at any rate have
been that danger.”

“Surely she knew you went every day to church,” Stransom objected.

“She didn’t know what I went for.”

“Of me then she never even heard?”

“You’ll think I was deceitful.  But I didn’t need to be!”

He was now on the lower door-step, and his hostess held the door
half-closed behind him.  Through what remained of the opening he saw her
framed face.  He made a supreme appeal.  “What _did_ he do to you?”

“It would have come out—_she _would have told you.  That fear at my
heart—that was my reason!”  And she closed the door, shutting him out.


CHAPTER: CHAPTER VIII.


He had ruthlessly abandoned her—that of course was what he had done.
Stransom made it all out in solitude, at leisure, fitting the unmatched
pieces gradually together and dealing one by one with a hundred obscure
points.  She had known Hague only after her present friend’s relations
with him had wholly terminated; obviously indeed a good while after; and
it was natural enough that of his previous life she should have
ascertained only what he had judged good to communicate.  There were
passages it was quite conceivable that even in moments of the tenderest
expansion he should have withheld.  Of many facts in the career of a man
so in the eye of the world there was of course a common knowledge; but
this lady lived apart from public affairs, and the only time perfectly
clear to her would have been the time following the dawn of her own
drama.  A man in her place would have “looked up” the past—would even
have consulted old newspapers.  It remained remarkable indeed that in her
long contact with the partner of her retrospect no accident had lighted a
train; but there was no arguing about that; the accident had in fact
come: it had simply been that security had prevailed.  She had taken what
Hague had given her, and her blankness in respect of his other connexions
was only a touch in the picture of that plasticity Stransom had supreme
reason to know so great a master could have been trusted to produce.

This picture was for a while all our friend saw: he caught his breath
again and again as it came over him that the woman with whom he had had
for years so fine a point of contact was a woman whom Acton Hague, of all
men in the world, had more or less fashioned.  Such as she sat there
to-day she was ineffaceably stamped with him.  Beneficent, blameless as
Stransom held her, he couldn’t rid himself of the sense that he had been,
as who should say, swindled.  She had imposed upon him hugely, though she
had known it as little as he.  All this later past came back to him as a
time grotesquely misspent.  Such at least were his first reflexions;
after a while he found himself more divided and only, as the end of it,
more troubled.  He imagined, recalled, reconstituted, figured out for
himself the truth she had refused to give him; the effect of which was to
make her seem to him only more saturated with her fate.  He felt her
spirit, through the whole strangeness, finer than his own to the very
degree in which she might have been, in which she certainly had been,
more wronged.  A women, when wronged, was always more wronged than a man,
and there were conditions when the least she could have got off with was
more than the most he could have to bear.  He was sure this rare creature
wouldn’t have got off with the least.  He was awestruck at the thought of
such a surrender—such a prostration.  Moulded indeed she had been by
powerful hands, to have converted her injury into an exaltation so
sublime.  The fellow had only had to die for everything that was ugly in
him to be washed out in a torrent.  It was vain to try to guess what had
taken place, but nothing could be clearer than that she had ended by
accusing herself.  She absolved him at every point, she adored her very
wounds.  The passion by which he had profited had rushed back after its
ebb, and now the tide of tenderness, arrested for ever at flood, was too
deep even to fathom.  Stransom sincerely considered that he had forgiven
him; but how little he had achieved the miracle that she had achieved!
His forgiveness was silence, but hers was mere unuttered sound.  The
light she had demanded for his altar would have broken his silence with a
blare; whereas all the lights in the church were for her too great a
hush.

She had been right about the difference—she had spoken the truth about
the change: Stransom was soon to know himself as perversely but sharply
jealous.  _His_ tide had ebbed, not flowed; if he had “forgiven” Acton
Hague, that forgiveness was a motive with a broken spring.  The very fact
of her appeal for a material sign, a sign that should make her dead lover
equal there with the others, presented the concession to her friend as
too handsome for the case.  He had never thought of himself as hard, but
an exorbitant article might easily render him so.  He moved round and
round this one, but only in widening circles—the more he looked at it the
less acceptable it seemed.  At the same time he had no illusion about the
effect of his refusal; he perfectly saw how it would make for a rupture.
He left her alone a week, but when at last he again called this
conviction was cruelly confirmed.  In the interval he had kept away from
the church, and he needed no fresh assurance from her to know she hadn’t
entered it.  The change was complete enough: it had broken up her life.
Indeed it had broken up his, for all the fires of his shrine seemed to
him suddenly to have been quenched.  A great indifference fell upon him,
the weight of which was in itself a pain; and he never knew what his
devotion had been for him till in that shock it ceased like a dropped
watch.  Neither did he know with how large a confidence he had counted on
the final service that had now failed: the mortal deception was that in
this abandonment the whole future gave way.

These days of her absence proved to him of what she was capable; all the
more that he never dreamed she was vindictive or even resentful.  It was
not in anger she had forsaken him; it was in simple submission to hard
reality, to the stern logic of life.  This came home to him when he sat
with her again in the room in which her late aunt’s conversation lingered
like the tone of a cracked piano.  She tried to make him forget how much
they were estranged, but in the very presence of what they had given up
it was impossible not to be sorry for her.  He had taken from her so much
more than she had taken from him.  He argued with her again, told her she
could now have the altar to herself; but she only shook her head with
pleading sadness, begging him not to waste his breath on the impossible,
the extinct.  Couldn’t he see that in relation to her private need the
rites he had established were practically an elaborate exclusion?  She
regretted nothing that had happened; it had all been right so long as she
didn’t know, and it was only that now she knew too much and that from the
moment their eyes were open they would simply have to conform.  It had
doubtless been happiness enough for them to go on together so long.  She
was gentle, grateful, resigned; but this was only the form of a deep
immoveability.  He saw he should never more cross the threshold of the
second room, and he felt how much this alone would make a stranger of him
and give a conscious stiffness to his visits.  He would have hated to
plunge again into that well of reminders, but he enjoyed quite as little
the vacant alternative.

After he had been with her three or four times it struck him that to have
come at last into her house had had the horrid effect of diminishing
their intimacy.  He had known her better, had liked her in greater
freedom, when they merely walked together or kneeled together.  Now they
only pretended; before they had been nobly sincere.  They began to try
their walks again, but it proved a lame imitation, for these things, from
the first, beginning or ending, had been connected with their visits to
the church.  They had either strolled away as they came out or gone in to
rest on the return.  Stransom, besides, now faltered; he couldn’t walk as
of old.  The omission made everything false; it was a dire mutilation of
their lives.  Our friend was frank and monotonous, making no mystery of
his remonstrance and no secret of his predicament.  Her response,
whatever it was, always came to the same thing—an implied invitation to
him to judge, if he spoke of predicaments, of how much comfort she had in
hers.  For him indeed was no comfort even in complaint, since every
allusion to what had befallen them but made the author of their trouble
more present.  Acton Hague was between them—that was the essence of the
matter, and never so much between them as when they were face to face.
Then Stransom, while still wanting to banish him, had the strangest sense
of striving for an ease that would involve having accepted him.  Deeply
disconcerted by what he knew, he was still worse tormented by really not
knowing.  Perfectly aware that it would have been horribly vulgar to
abuse his old friend or to tell his companion the story of their quarrel,
it yet vexed him that her depth of reserve should give him no opening and
should have the effect of a magnanimity greater even than his own.

He challenged himself, denounced himself, asked himself if he were in
love with her that he should care so much what adventures she had had.
He had never for a moment allowed he was in love with her; therefore
nothing could have surprised him more than to discover he was jealous.
What but jealousy could give a man that sore contentious wish for the
detail of what would make him suffer?  Well enough he knew indeed that he
should never have it from the only person who to-day could give it to
him.  She let him press her with his sombre eyes, only smiling at him
with an exquisite mercy and breathing equally little the word that would
expose her secret and the word that would appear to deny his literal
right to bitterness.  She told nothing, she judged nothing; she accepted
everything but the possibility of her return to the old symbols.
Stransom divined that for her too they had been vividly individual, had
stood for particular hours or particular attributes—particular links in
her chain.  He made it clear to himself, as he believed, that his
difficulty lay in the fact that the very nature of the plea for his
faithless friend constituted a prohibition; that it happened to have come
from _her_ was precisely the vice that attached to it.  To the voice of
impersonal generosity he felt sure he would have listened; he would have
deferred to an advocate who, speaking from abstract justice, knowing of
his denial without having known Hague, should have had the imagination to
say: “Ah, remember only the best of him; pity him; provide for him.”  To
provide for him on the very ground of having discovered another of his
turpitudes was not to pity but to glorify him.  The more Stransom thought
the more he made out that whatever this relation of Hague’s it could only
have been a deception more or less finely practised.  Where had it come
into the life that all men saw?  Why had one never heard of it if it had
had the frankness of honourable things?  Stransom knew enough of his
other ties, of his obligations and appearances, not to say enough of his
general character, to be sure there had been some infamy.  In one way or
another this creature had been coldly sacrificed.  That was why at the
last as well as the first he must still leave him out and out.


CHAPTER: CHAPTER IX.


And yet this was no solution, especially after he had talked again to his
friend of all it had been his plan she should finally do for him.  He had
talked in the other days, and she had responded with a frankness
qualified only by a courteous reluctance, a reluctance that touched him,
to linger on the question of his death.  She had then practically
accepted the charge, suffered him to feel he could depend upon her to be
the eventual guardian of his shrine; and it was in the name of what had
so passed between them that he appealed to her not to forsake him in his
age.  She listened at present with shining coldness and all her habitual
forbearance to insist on her terms; her deprecation was even still
tenderer, for it expressed the compassion of her own sense that he was
abandoned.  Her terms, however, remained the same, and scarcely the less
audible for not being uttered; though he was sure that secretly even more
than he she felt bereft of the satisfaction his solemn trust was to have
provided her.  They both missed the rich future, but she missed it most,
because after all it was to have been entirely hers; and it was her
acceptance of the loss that gave him the full measure of her preference
for the thought of Acton Hague over any other thought whatever.  He had
humour enough to laugh rather grimly when he said to himself: “Why the
deuce does she like him so much more than she likes me?”—the reasons
being really so conceivable.  But even his faculty of analysis left the
irritation standing, and this irritation proved perhaps the greatest
misfortune that had ever overtaken him.  There had been nothing yet that
made him so much want to give up.  He had of course by this time well
reached the age of renouncement; but it had not hitherto been vivid to
him that it was time to give up everything.

Practically, at the end of six months, he had renounced the friendship
once so charming and comforting.  His privation had two faces, and the
face it had turned to him on the occasion of his last attempt to
cultivate that friendship was the one he could look at least.  This was
the privation he inflicted; the other was the privation he bore.  The
conditions she never phrased he used to murmur to himself in solitude:
“One more, one more—only just one.”  Certainly he was going down; he
often felt it when he caught himself, over his work, staring at vacancy
and giving voice to that inanity.  There was proof enough besides in his
being so weak and so ill.  His irritation took the form of melancholy,
and his melancholy that of the conviction that his health had quite
failed.  His altar moreover had ceased to exist; his chapel, in his
dreams, was a great dark cavern.  All the lights had gone out—all his
Dead had died again.  He couldn’t exactly see at first how it had been in
the power of his late companion to extinguish them, since it was neither
for her nor by her that they had been called into being.  Then he
understood that it was essentially in his own soul the revival had taken
place, and that in the air of this soul they were now unable to breathe.
The candles might mechanically burn, but each of them had lost its
lustre.  The church had become a void; it was his presence, her presence,
their common presence, that had made the indispensable medium.  If
anything was wrong everything was—her silence spoiled the tune.

Then when three months were gone he felt so lonely that he went back;
reflecting that as they had been his best society for years his Dead
perhaps wouldn’t let him forsake them without doing something more for
him.  They stood there, as he had left them, in their tall radiance, the
bright cluster that had already made him, on occasions when he was
willing to compare small things with great, liken them to a group of
sea-lights on the edge of the ocean of life.  It was a relief to him,
after a while, as he sat there, to feel they had still a virtue.  He was
more and more easily tired, and he always drove now; the action of his
heart was weak and gave him none of the reassurance conferred by the
action of his fancy.  None the less he returned yet again, returned
several times, and finally, during six months, haunted the place with a
renewal of frequency and a strain of impatience.  In winter the church
was unwarmed and exposure to cold forbidden him, but the glow of his
shrine was an influence in which he could almost bask.  He sat and
wondered to what he had reduced his absent associate and what she now did
with the hours of her absence.  There were other churches, there were
other altars, there were other candles; in one way or another her piety
would still operate; he couldn’t absolutely have deprived her of her
rites.  So he argued, but without contentment; for he well enough knew
there was no other such rare semblance of the mountain of light she had
once mentioned to him as the satisfaction of her need.  As this semblance
again gradually grew great to him and his pious practice more regular, he
found a sharper and sharper pang in the imagination of her darkness; for
never so much as in these weeks had his rites been real, never had his
gathered company seemed so to respond and even to invite.  He lost
himself in the large lustre, which was more and more what he had from the
first wished it to be—as dazzling as the vision of heaven in the mind of
a child.  He wandered in the fields of light; he passed, among the tall
tapers, from tier to tier, from fire to fire, from name to name, from the
white intensity of one clear emblem, of one saved soul, to another.  It
was in the quiet sense of having saved his souls that his deep strange
instinct rejoiced.  This was no dim theological rescue, no boon of a
contingent world; they were saved better than faith or works could save
them, saved for the warm world they had shrunk_ _from dying to, for
actuality, for continuity, for the certainty of human remembrance.

By this time he had survived all his friends; the last straight flame was
three years old, there was no one to add to the list.  Over and over he
called his roll, and it appeared to him compact and complete.  Where
should he put in another, where, if there were no other objection, would
it stand in its place in the rank?  He reflected, with a want of
sincerity of which he was quite conscious, that it would be difficult to
determine that place.  More and more, besides, face to face with his
little legion, over endless histories, handling the empty shells and
playing with the silence—more and more he could see that he had never
introduced an alien.  He had had his great companions, his
indulgences—there were cases in which they had been immense; but what had
his devotion after all been if it hadn’t been at bottom a respect?  He
was, however, himself surprised at his stiffness; by the end of the
winter the responsibility of it was what was uppermost in his thoughts.
The refrain had grown old to them, that plea for just one more.  There
came a day when, for simple exhaustion, if symmetry should demand just
one he was ready so far to meet symmetry.  Symmetry was harmony, and the
idea of harmony began to haunt him; he said to himself that harmony was
of course everything.  He took, in fancy, his composition to pieces,
redistributing it into other lines, making other juxtapositions and
contrasts.  He shifted this and that candle, he made the spaces
different, he effaced the disfigurement of a possible gap.  There were
subtle and complex relations, a scheme of cross-reference, and moments in
which he seemed to catch a glimpse of the void so sensible to the woman
who wandered in exile or sat where he had seen her with the portrait of
Acton Hague.  Finally, in this way, he arrived at a conception of the
total, the ideal, which left a clear opportunity for just another figure.
“Just one more—to round it off; just one more, just one,” continued to
hum in his head.  There was a strange confusion in the thought, for he
felt the day to be near when he too should be one of the Others.  What in
this event would the Others matter to him, since they only mattered to
the living?  Even as one of the Dead what would his altar matter to him,
since his particular dream of keeping it up had melted away?  What had
harmony to do with the case if his lights were all to be quenched?  What
he had hoped for was an instituted thing.  He might perpetuate it on some
other pretext, but his special meaning would have dropped.  This meaning
was to have lasted with the life of the one other person who understood
it.

In March he had an illness during which he spent a fortnight in bed, and
when he revived a little he was told of two things that had happened.
One was that a lady whose name was not known to the servants (she left
none) had been three times to ask about him; the other was that in his
sleep and on an occasion when his mind evidently wandered he was heard to
murmur again and again: “Just one more—just one.”  As soon as he found
himself able to go out, and before the doctor in attendance had
pronounced him so, he drove to see the lady who had come to ask about
him.  She was not at home; but this gave him the opportunity, before his
strength should fall again, to take his way to the church.  He entered it
alone; he had declined, in a happy manner he possessed of being able to
decline effectively, the company of his servant or of a nurse.  He knew
now perfectly what these good people thought; they had discovered his
clandestine connexion, the magnet that had drawn him for so many years,
and doubtless attached a significance of their own to the odd words they
had repeated to him.  The nameless lady was the clandestine connexion—a
fact nothing could have made clearer than his indecent haste to rejoin
her.  He sank on his knees before his altar while his head fell over on
his hands.  His weakness, his life’s weariness overtook him.  It seemed
to him he had come for the great surrender.  At first he asked himself
how he should get away; then, with the failing belief in the power, the
very desire to move gradually left him.  He had come, as he always came,
to lose himself; the fields of light were still there to stray in; only
this time, in straying, he would never come back.  He had given himself
to his Dead, and it was good: this time his Dead would keep him.  He
couldn’t rise from his knees; he believed he should never rise again; all
he could do was to lift his face and fix his eyes on his lights.  They
looked unusually, strangely splendid, but the one that always drew him
most had an unprecedented lustre.  It was the central voice of the choir,
the glowing heart of the brightness, and on this occasion it seemed to
expand, to spread great wings of flame.  The whole altar flared—dazzling
and blinding; but the source of the vast radiance burned clearer than the
rest, gathering itself into form, and the form was human beauty and human
charity, was the far-off face of Mary Antrim.  She smiled at him from the
glory of heaven—she brought the glory down with her to take him.  He
bowed his head in submission and at the same moment another wave rolled
over him.  Was it the quickening of joy to pain?  In the midst of his joy
at any rate he felt his buried face grow hot as with some communicated
knowledge that had the force of a reproach.  It suddenly made him
contrast that very rapture with the bliss he had refused to another.
This breath of the passion immortal was all that other had asked; the
descent of Mary Antrim opened his spirit with a great compunctious throb
for the descent of Acton Hague.  It was as if Stransom had read what her
eyes said to him.

After a moment he looked round in a despair that made him feel as if the
source of life were ebbing.  The church had been empty—he was alone; but
he wanted to have something done, to make a last appeal.  This idea gave
him strength for an effort; he rose to his feet with a movement that made
him turn, supporting himself by the back of a bench.  Behind him was a
prostrate figure, a figure he had seen before; a woman in deep mourning,
bowed in grief or in prayer.  He had seen her in other days—the first
time of his entrance there, and he now slightly wavered, looking at her
again till she seemed aware he had noticed her.  She raised her head and
met his eyes: the partner of his long worship had come back.  She looked
across at him an instant with a face wondering and scared; he saw he had
made her afraid.  Then quickly rising she came straight to him with both
hands out.

“Then you _could_ come?  God sent you!” he murmured with a happy smile.

“You’re very ill—you shouldn’t be here,” she urged in anxious reply.

“God sent me too, I think.  I was ill when I came, but the sight of you
does wonders.”  He held her hands, which steadied and quickened him.
“I’ve something to tell you.”

“Don’t tell me!” she tenderly pleaded; “let me tell you.  This afternoon,
by a miracle, the sweetest of miracles, the sense of our difference left
me.  I was out—I was near, thinking, wandering alone, when, on the spot,
something changed in my heart.  It’s my confession—there it is.  To come
back, to come back on the instant—the idea gave me wings.  It was as if I
suddenly saw something—as if it all became possible.  I could come for
what you yourself came for: that was enough.  So here I am.  It’s not for
my own—that’s over.  But I’m here for _them_.”  And breathless,
infinitely relieved by her low precipitate explanation, she looked with
eyes that reflected all its splendour at the magnificence of their altar.

“They’re here for you,” Stransom said, “they’re present to-night as
they’ve never been.  They speak for you—don’t you see?—in a passion of
light; they sing out like a choir of angels.  Don’t you hear what they
say?—they offer the very thing you asked of me.”

“Don’t talk of it—don’t think of it; forget it!”  She spoke in hushed
supplication, and while the alarm deepened in her eyes she disengaged one
of her hands and passed an arm round him to support him better, to help
him to sink into a seat.

He let himself go, resting on her; he dropped upon the bench and she fell
on her knees beside him, his own arm round her shoulder.  So he remained
an instant, staring up at his shrine.  “They say there’s a gap in the
array—they say it’s not full, complete.  Just one more,” he went on,
softly—“isn’t that what you wanted?  Yes, one more, one more.”

“Ah no more—no more!” she wailed, as with a quick new horror of it, under
her breath.

“Yes, one more,” he repeated, simply; “just one!”  And with this his head
dropped on her shoulder; she felt that in his weakness he had fainted.
But alone with him in the dusky church a great dread was on her of what
might still happen, for his face had the whiteness of death.