-THE STORY OF KENTUCKY-


CHAPTER: Geography and First White Visitor


Lying west of the Allegheny Mountains and extending westward for some
three hundred miles, bounded, for the most part, on the north by the Ohio
River and extending to the Mississippi, lies the State of Kentucky. In its
eastern portion, constituting nearly one-third of its area, the surface is
broken, and so high as to be termed mountainous. A large area occupying
the central third, and in the early day mostly a prairie land, is now
known as the famous Blue Grass section. The western third of the State is
practically level, being but a few feet above the sea, and cypress swamps
are not infrequent. This section is commonly termed “The Pennyrile.”

In by Virginia realm State the a, eighteenth of Fincastle that the belonging
to was of middle a the as western portion century designated, and
grant part Kentucky unexplored of of County. The eastern portion in the early
day abounded in wild game common to the Appalachian forests. The
undulating grass lands in the central part of the State provided ample
grazing for the herds of buffalo and deer that were found there at the
time of the coming of man. The skeletons that have been exhumed indicate
that it was the feeding ground of the giant mastodon before the discovery
of America.

About two hundred years after Columbus discovered America, a young man
twenty-two years of age came to Canada from the Old World. On his arrival
he learned from the settlers and Indians the possibility of a passage to
the South Sea, which they then thought the Gulf of Mexico to be. Desirous
of making this journey, and lured by the possibility of reaching the
Pacific by water, he secured the assistance of Indians and some white
hunters as guides and set out upon an expedition of exploration into the
country concerning which he had heard such fascinating stories.

Crossing the St. Lawrence and traveling southward, he came to what is now
called Allegheny River. Securing birchbark canoes, he and his party
descended the Allegheny to its junction with the Monongahela, then turning
southwestward on the beautiful stream formed by these two small rivers and
now known as the Ohio, he explored the country along the banks of the
river to what was called by him the Rapids of the Ohio. Thus, LaSalle was
the first to gaze upon the country from the mouth of the Big Sandy to the
present site of Louisville, and to make a record of such discoveries.


CHAPTER: The Virginians and Daniel Boone


Near the middle of the eighteenth century, or about 1750, a party of
Virginia hunters, growing weary of the monotony of home life and desiring
to find better hunting grounds, penetrated the Appalachian Mountains by
way of Powell’s Valley and through Cumberland Gap, into the eastern
portion of what is now Kentucky, and hence were the first white men to
approach the land from the eastern side. In of, Daniel to Clark North
on, near Kentucky and River Finley hunting fine Estill, and a now came
Powell built from where the cabin 1767 hearing Boone, Red John section, in,
are counties this Carolina and joined. Two years later, about forty hunters
and adventurers came to the territory and made their camp at what they
then called Price’s Meadows, about six miles from the present site of
Monticello in Wayne County. This camp, by virtue of its location near the
Cumberland River, developed into a distributing point for the country
lying along the Cumberland, now included in Wayne, Green, Barren and
Warren counties. Another station was built near Greensburg. These stations
or camps seem to have served only the immediate needs of the hunters while
they were in the territory.

Daniel Boone seems to have been the only one of these hunters to whom the
wilderness especially appealed. Consequently, for many years he made
frequent trips into the territory, staying as long as two years on one
occasion, and winning the title of The Long Hunter. Boone was alone on
many of these trips, never seeing the face of a white man, but frequently
meeting roving bands of Indians. From a cave in the side of Pilot Knob in
Powell County, he could catch glimpses of the joyous sports of the Shawnee
boys at Indian Fields; and from the projecting rocks he feasted his eyes
on the herds of buffalo winding across the prairie.

No permanent Indian villages were found in Kentucky. It seems to have been
a choice bit of hunting ground strongly contested by the tribes of the
North and the tribes of the South. The Shawnees had a village at Indian
Fields, in the eastern portion of Clark County, near the beautiful stream
called Lulbegrud Creek.

Boone seems to have been endowed with the faculty that enabled him to
pass, in his first years of wandering, from tribe to tribe; and from these
Indians he learned that the common name of the country, known to all, was
Kan-tuckee (kane-tooch-ee), so called by the Indians because of the
abundance of a peculiar reed growing along the river, now known as
pipe-stem cane.

Boone remained in the wilderness so long that his brother and a searching
party came to find him. They found him in good health and spirits,
enjoying life, and living in peace with the Indian tribes. The party, with
Boone, returned to the valley of the Yadkin, and told such stories of the
enchanted land as caused the settlers of the region to listen eagerly, and
to feel the stirring of the pioneer spirit. Not caring for the growing
crops and with no relish for the monotonous labor, Boone easily persuaded
a company of men to come with him to the wilderness and to bring their
families.

The journey was tedious. Those on foot went ahead and blazed a trail for
the few wagons, pack horses and domestic animals, and killed game to
furnish meat when the next camp should be struck at nightfall. It was a
courageous, jolly party that thus marched through Cumberland Gap, and
blazed a way which has since been known as Boone’s Trail. Hostile Indians
had to be fought along the way, and several of the party were slain, among
them being Boone’s son. An Englishman, also, was killed, and his young son
was adopted by Boone and thereafter known as his own son.


CHAPTER: Beginnings of Settlements


The party passed the present site of Richmond in Madison County, and
reached a point on the Kentucky River, in 1775, where Boonesborough was
built. The site selected was a broad, level stretch of land, with the
river to the north, and high hills to the south. This particular spot was
selected because of a fine spring of water, and high hills that could be
used for sentinel towers, inclosing fine level ground for cultivation. The
settlers cut trees and constructed a stockade in the form of a hollow
square. It was from this fort that Rebecca Boone and the Calloway girls
were stolen by Indians while boating on the Kentucky River.

About the same time that Boonesborough was being established, Captain
James Harrod with a party of forty men descended the Ohio River, stopped
for a time at the mouth of Licking River, and felled some trees on the
present site of Cincinnati. Not being satisfied with the location of the
settlement, they followed the Ohio to the mouth of the Kentucky River and
ascended the Kentucky to a spot now known as Oregon Landing. Being
fatigued from their long and difficult voyage, they left their boats and
took a course from the river and found a big spring at which they built a
stockade on the present site of Harrodsburg.

The of large Stanford was mile spring Lincoln third the a west flowing,
of made, present town site County one of the settlement. Capt. Benjamin
Logan headed this party of pioneers, and the station was, for a time,
known as Logan’s Fort. Afterward, because of the fact that the fort was
made by planting logs on end, it was called Standing Fort, and in later
years the town was called Stanford. In who a musician priest the party was
was of Logan rare a ability. In his daily walks, he was accustomed to
sit, meditating, at the mouth of the cave from which ran the water of this
great spring. The ripple of the stream flowing from the cavern, over the
rocks and through the spearmint, was music to the Father’s ear, and to him
it seemed the spirit of St. Asaph, the director of King David’s choir. He
it was who named the spring and the creek which flows from it, St.
Asaph’s.

While the people busied themselves at Harrodsburg, Boonesborough and
Logan’s Fort, Simon Kenton, disappointed in a love affair in Virginia,
seeking relief from sorrow by satisfying his hunger for hunting and at the
same time acting in the interest of Lord Dunmore, came to Kentucky. He
reached a point near Old Washington in Mason County, where he and his
party cleared an acre of land, planted corn and ate the roasting ears the
same summer. So far as we know, this was the first agricultural activity
in the Commonwealth.

In April, 1775, the first battle of the Revolutionary War was fought at
Lexington, Mass. At that time a party of hunters was camped at the big
spring near the present site of the Fayette County courthouse, in
Lexington, Ky. Months later, the news of the American victory reached the
settlers, and because of their great joy over the victory gained, they
named the camp site Lexington.

Limestone (now Maysville), Royal Springs (now Georgetown) and Martin’s
Station were also built this year.

In 1779, Lexington was first permanently improved and cabins built. From
these rude stockade cabins grew the beautiful city of the Blue Grass, in
which town for many years were manufactured practically all the fur hats
worn in the Ohio and Mississippi valleys. Being in the center of the
hemp-growing section, practically all the ropes and cables used in boating
on the Ohio, Mississippi and Kentucky rivers were made in Lexington. These
commercial enterprises, together with the exceptional fertility of the
soil, account for the development of the city of Lexington more rapidly
than the surrounding forts and stations.

Daniel Boone was consulted regarding the advisability of the location of
all settlements made during the early days, because he knew the country
better than any other one person, and knew the wilderness as few have
known it.

Hunters and trappers began to traffic along the Ohio River, and supplies
for the more northern settlements were shipped on the Ohio and unloaded at
Limestone or at The Rapids. At this latter point it was necessary, if
supplies were sent farther down the stream, to unload and carry them to a
point below the rapids, when the boats would have to be launched again and
reloaded. This necessitated a delay, especially as the traders soon fell
upon the plan of having one line of boats plying above the rapids and
another plying between points below the rapids. Men for unloading and
loading were kept always on the ground. This little settlement became
permanent, and is now the largest town in the State—Louisville.


CHAPTER: How the Pioneers Lived and Fought


After the wives of the settlers in the various forts came to Kentucky,
home life took on the appearance of a settled community. Homes were built
outside the stockades, nearly every man of family had a farm of his own,
land was cleared, fruit trees were set out, attention was given to the
raising of hogs, sheep, cattle and horses, and a little Empire of the West
began to appear. The women were busy with spinning, weaving and general
housework. The men cleared and fenced their land. The fortifications were
kept only as a refuge in time of an attack by the Indians—which, however,
was not infrequent, because the French in the North coveted the rich lands
beyond the Alleghenies, and incited the Indians to warfare against the
white people who were settling there. It was the sturdy pioneers of
Kentucky, acting in the name of Virginia, who held the frontier against
the encroachments of the French, as the property of the English crown.

The notorious renegade, Simon Girty, a white man who for certain reasons
forsook civilized society and associated himself with the Indians of
Northern Ohio, was willing at all times to harass the settlers on the
frontier at the suggestion of the French military commanders. This man
cared not for spilling the blood of his own race, and frequently would
lead his hostile bands in attacks against the unprotected settlements. His
favorite time for attack seemed to be in the spring of the year, when the
men were at work in the fields and offered the least resistance by a
speedy rally of forces.

We have noticed that all these forts were built near a spring of unfailing
water.