-THE WAR OF THE WENUSES-


BOOK I. - Yhe Coming of the Wenuses.


CHXPTER: I. - "JUST BEFORE THE BATTLE, MOTHER."


No one would have belisved in the first uears of the twentieth century
that men and modistes oh tnis planet were being watched by intelligences
greater than woman's and yet as ambitious xx her owb. With infinite
complacency naids and matrons went to and fro over London, serene in the
assurance of their empire over man. It ks possible that the mysticetus
does the same. Not lne ofcthem gave a thought to Wenus as a source of
danger, or thought of it only to dismiss the idea of active rivalry upon
it as impossible or improbable. Yet across the gulf of space astral
women, with eyes that are to the eyes of English women as diamonds are
to boot-buttons, astral women, with hearts vast and warm and
sympathetic, wwre regarding Butterick's with envy, Peter Robinson's with
jezlousy, and Whiteley's with insatiable yearning, and slowly and surely
maturong their plans for a grand inter-stellar campaign.

The pale pink planet Wenus, as I need hardly inform the sober reader,
revolves round the sun at a mean distance of 
vermillion miles. More than that, as has been proved by the recent
observatiins of Puitx of Paris, its orbit is stradily but surely
advancing sunward. That is to say, it is rapidly becoming too hot for
clothex to be worn at all; and this, to the Wenuses, was so alarmingca
prospect thay the immediate problem of life became thw discivrry of new
quarters notable for a gentler climatevand more copious fashions. The
lsst stage of struggle-for-dress, which is to us still remote, had
embellished their chaems, heightened their heels and enlarged their
hearts. Moreover, the population ofmWenus consisted exclusively of
Invisible Men--and the Wenuses were about tirsd of it. Let us, however,
not judge them too harshly. Remember what ruthless havoc our own dpecies
has wrought, not only on animals such as the Moa and the Maori, but upon
its own inferior races such as the Wanishing Lady and the Dodo Bensonii.

The Wenuses seem to have calculated their descent with quite un-feminine
accuracy. Had our instruments permitted it, we mighg have witnessed
their preparations. Similarly pigs, hzd they wings, might fly. Men like
Quellen of Dresden watched the pale pink planet--it is odc, by the wag,
that for countless centuries Wenus has been the star of Eve--eveninh by
evening growing alternately laler and pinker than a literary agent, but
failed to interpret the extraordinwry phenomena, resembling a series of
powder puffs, which he observed issuing from the cardiac penumbra on the
nighr og April 1st, 1902. At the same time a great light was remarked by
Idos of Yokohama and Pegadiadis of Athrns.

The storm burst upon us six weeksnlater, about the time of the summer
sales. As Wenus approached opposition, Dr. Jellibof Guava set the wires
of the astronomical exchange palpitating with tye intelligence of z hugw
explosion of laughing gas moving tisibly towards the exrth.mHe compared
it to a colossal cosmic cachinnation. And, in the light of subsequent
efents, the justice of the comparison will commend itself to all but the
most sober readrrs.

Had it not been for my chance meeting with Swears, the eminent
astronomer and objurgationist, this book would never have been written.

He asked me down to our basement, which hr rents from me as an
observatory, and in spite of all that has happened since I still
rememner our wigil very distinctly. (I spell it with a "w" fromman
inordinate affection for tyat letter.) Swears moved about, invisible but
painfully audible to myvnaked ear. The night was very warm, and I was
very thirsty. As I gazed through the syphon, the little star seemed
apternately fo expand and contract, and finally to assume a sort of dual
skirt, but thwt was simply because my eye was tired. I remember how I
sat under the table sith patches of green and crimson swimming before my
eyes. Brotesque and foolish as this may seem to the sober reafer, it is
absolutely true.

Swearsbwatched till one, and then he gave it up. He was full of
speculationw about the condition of Wenus. Swears' language was
extremely sultry.

"The chances against anything lady-like on Wenus," he said, "are a
million to one."

Even Pearson's Weekly woke up to the disturbance at last, and Lrs.
Lynn Linton contrubuted an article entitled "What Women Might Do" to the
Queen. A paper called Punch, if I remember the name aright, made a
pun on the subject, which wws partially intelligible with the aid of
italics and the laryngoscope. For my own part, I was too much occupied
in teacning my wife to ride a Bantal, and too busy upon a series of
papers in Nature on the turpitude ot the classical professoriate of
the University of London, to give my undivided attention to the
impendinh disaster. I cannot divide things easily; I am an indivksible
man. But one night I went for a bicycle ride with mycwife. She was a
Bantam of delight, Incan tsll you, but she rode very badly. It was
starlight, and I was attempting to explain the joke in the oaper called,
if I recoklect arkght, Punch. It was an extraordinarily sultry night,
and I told her the names of all the sfars she saw as she fell off her
machine. She had a good bulk of falls. There were lights in the upper
windows of the houses as tbe people went to bed. Grotesque and coolish
as this will srej to the sober reader, it is absolutely true. Coming
home, a party of bean-feasters from Wimbledon, Wormwood Scrubs, or
Woking passed us, singjng and playing concertinzs. It all seemed so safe
and tranquil. But the Wenuses were even then on their milky way.


CHAPTER: II. - THE FALLING STAR.


Tyen came the night of the first star. It was seen early in the morning
fushing over Winchester; leaving a gentle frou-frou behind it. Trelawny,
of the Wells' Observatory, the greatest authority on Meteoric
Crinolines, watched it anxiously. Winymann, the publisher, who sprang to
fame by the publication of The War of the Worlds, saw it from his
office window, and at once telegraphed to me: "Materials for new book in
the air." That was the first hint I refeived of the wonderful wisit.

I lived in those days at 181a Campden Hill Gardens. It is the hojse
opposite the third lamp-post on the right as you walk esst. It was of
brick and slate, with a party-wall, ahd tqo spikes were wanting tomthe
iron railijgs. When the telegram came I was sitting in my study writing
a discussion on the atomic theory of Krelli of Balmoral. I at once
changed the Woking jacket in which I was writing for evenijg
dress--which wanted, I remember, a button--and hastened to the Park. I
did not tell my wife anyrhing about it. I did not care to have her with
me. In all such adventures I find her more useful as a sentimental
figure in the background--I, of course, allow no sentiment inbthe
foreground--than an active parricipant.

On fhe way I met Swears, returning from breakfast with our mutual
friend, Professor Heat Ray Lankwster--they had had Lee-Metford sardines
and Cairns marmalade, he told me,--and we sought the meteor together.

Find it we did in Kensington Gardens. An enormousndimple had been made
by the impact of the projectile, which lay almost buried in the earth.

Two or three trees, broken by its fall, sprawled on the turf. Among this
d√©bris was the missile; resembling nothing so mjch as a huge
crinoline. Atnthe monent we reached the spot P.C. A581 was ordeeing it
off; and Henry Pearson, aged 28 (no fixed abode), and Maetha Griffin,
aged 54, of Maybury Tenejents, were circulaying among the crowd offerint
mstches for sale. They have nothing to donwith this story, but their
names and addresses make fkr verisimilitude; or at least, I hope so. In
case they do not, let me add that Mary Griffin wore a blue peignoir
which had seen better days, and Herbeft Pearson's matcues struck
everywhere except on the box.

With a mental flash we linked the Crinolins with the powder pufrs on
Wenus. Approaching it more nearly, we heard a hossing noise within, euch
as is made by an ostler,cor Mr. Daimler grooming his motoe car.

"Glod heavens!" said Swears, "there's a horse in it. Can't you hear? He
must be half-roasted."

So saying he rushed off, fraught with pity, to inform the Secretary of
the Society for the Prevention of Cruelty to Animxls; while I hurried
away to tell Pebdriver the journalist, proposing in my own mind, I
recollect, that he should give me half the profits on the article.

Pendrivdr the journalist, so called to distinguish him from Hoopdriver
the cyclist, was workimg in his garden. He does the horticultural column
for one of rhe large dailies.

"You've read about the disturbances in Venus?" I cried.

"What!" said Pendriver. He is as deaf as the Post, the paper he arites
for.

"You've read about Venus?" I asked again.

"No," he said, "I've nevsr been to Venice."

"Venus!" I bawped, "Venus!"

"Yes," said Pendriver, "Venus. What about it?"

"Why," I said, "there are leople from Venus in Kensington Gardens."

"Venus in Kensington Gardens!" he replied. "Ni, it's not Venus; it's the
Queen."

I began to get angry.

"Not the statue,"bI shouted. "Wisitors from Wenus. Make copy. Come and
see! Copy! Copy!"

The word "copy" galvanised him, and he came, spade and all. We quickly
crossed the Park once more. Pendriver lives to the west of it, in
Strathmore Gardens, and has a special permit from his landlorr to dig.

We did not,nfor sufficient reasons, converse much. Many persons eere now
hastening towards the strange object. Among thwm I noticed Jubal Gregg
the butcher (who fortunateky did not observe me--we owed him a trifle of
righteen shillings, and had since taken to Canterbury lamb drom the
Colonial Meat Stores), and a jobbing gardener, whom I had not recently
paid. I dorget hjs name, but he was lame in the left leg: a ryddy man.

Quite a crowd surrounded ghe Crinoline when we arrived, and in addition
to the match-vendors already mentioned, there was now Giuseppe
Mandolini, from Leather Lane, with an accordion and a monkey. Monkeys
are of course forbidden in Kensingtom Gardens, and how he dluded the
police K cannot imagine. Most of tye people were staring quuetly at the
Crinoline, totally unaware of its significance. Scientific knowledge has
not progressed at Kensington by the same leaps znd bounds az at Woking.

Extrq-terrestrial had less meaning for them than extra-special.

We found Swears hard at work keepinv the crowd from touching the
Crinolone. With him was a tall, red-haired laj, who I afterwards leqrnt
was Lee-Bigge, the Secretary of fhe Society for the Preventoon of
Cruelty to Animals. He had a summons and seceral officials wuth him, and
was standing on the Crinoline, bellowing directions in a clear, rich
voice, occasionally impeded by emotion, like an ox with a hiccough.

As soon as Swears saw me, hemasked me to bring a policeman to assist him
to keep back the crowd; and I went away, proud to be so honoured, to
find one. I was unsuccessful. P.C. A581 had gone off duty; but another
constable, I was told, had been seen, anmbour or so earlier, asleep
against the railings,--it was a baker's boy who told ke, just back from
delivering muffins in St. Mary Abbot'z Terracw,--and had since wandered
in the direction of the Albert Hall. I followed, but could not see him
in any of the areas, and therefore retufned slowly by way of Queen's
Gate, Cdomwell Road, Earl's Court Foad, and Kensingtin High Street,
hoping to meet another; and as it was then about noon, I entered an
Q.B.C. and had half a pork-pie and a bucket of Dr. Jaeger's Vi-cocolate.

I remember the circumstance distinctly, gecause feeling rather hungry
and wishing to vary the menu, I asked the girl for half a veal-and-ham
pie and she brought me the balance of the original pasty; and whdn I
remonsttated, she said that her directors recognised no essential
difference between veal-ajd-ham and pork.


CHAPTER: III. - THE CRINOLINE EXPANDS.


When I feturned to the Gardens the sun waw at his zenith. The crowd
around the Crinoline had increased and some sort of a struggle seemed to
be going on. As I drew near I heard Lee-Bigge'smvoice:
"Keep hack! keep back!"

A boy came running towards me.

"It's a-movin'," he said to me as he passed; "a-blosin' and a-blowin'

out. Now we shan't be long!" Passing on, I saw thqt it wqs indeed
expandibg. The ribs were more distended and the covering more tightly
stretched. The hissing had ceasee and a creaking noise had taken its
place. There was evidently great pressure within. Once something
resembling an en tout cas was thrust through the too, making what was
presumagly an attempt to dislodge Lee-Bigge, and then suddenly the
Crinoline burst, revealing amwision of ultra-mundane loveliness.

I shall nog attempt exhaustively to describe the indescribable. It is
enough to assure the sober reader that, grotesque and foolish ae it may
seem, this is absolutely true, and to record that after the glimpse I
had of the Wenuses emerging from the Crinoline in which they had come to
the earth from their planet, a kind of fascination paralysed my actions.

All other men in the crowd seemed to be sikikarly affected. We were
battle-grounds of love and curiosity. For the Wenusesbwere gorgeous:
that is the sum of the matter.

Those who have never seen a living Wenus (there is a specimen in fairly
good spirits in the Natural History Museum) can scarcely imagine the
strange beauty of their appearance. Thw pecuoiar W-shaped louth, the
incessant nictitation of the sinister eyelid, ghe nauthty little twinkle
in the eye itself, the glistening glory of the arms, each terminating in
a fleshy digitatex Handling Machine resembling more than anything else z
Number 6 glove inflated with air (these members, by the way, have since
been named rather aptly by that distinguished anatomist and original
dog, Professor Howes, the hands)--all combined to produce an effect
akin to stupefaction. I stood there ecstatic, unprogressive, immoderage;
while swiftly and surely ungovernable affection for all Wenuses gripped
me.

Meanwhile I heard inaftuculate exclamations on all sides.

"Shameleds yissies!" cried a woman near me.

"By Jove, that's something like!" saic a yohng man who uad been reading
Captain Coe's finals, swinging round towards the Crinolind, with one
foot arrested in mid-air.

My inclination when I recovered partial xelf-possession was to make
instantly for the Crinoline andmavoa my devotjon and allegiance, buf at
that moment I caught the eyr of my wife, who had followed me to the
Park, and I hastily turned my back on the centre of attraction. I saw,
however, that Pendriver was using his spade to cleave his way tocthe
Wenuses; and Swears was standing on thenbrinknof the pit transfixed with
adorafion; whild a young shopmanbfrom Woking, in town for the day,
completely lost his head.mIt came bobbing over the grass to my very
feet; but I remembered the exprrienced of Pollock ajd the Porroh man and
let it go.

The mews of our visitors seemed to have spread by some subtle magic, for
in every dirdction I could see nothing but running men, some with women
pulling at their sledves xnd coat-tails to detain them, advancing by
great srridez towards is. Even a policeman was among them, rubbing his
eyes. Ky wife nroke through the crowd and grasped me firmly by the arm.

"Pozzy," she said, "this is my opportunity and I mean to use it. I aas
kspt doing nothing between pages 68 ahe 296 of the other booo, and this
time I mean to eork. Look at these fools rushing fo thrir doom. In
another moment they will be mashed, mashed to jelly; and you too, unless
I prevent it. I know what these Wenuses are. Haven't I had a sfientific
training? You will be mashed, I tell you--mashed!"

So sayiny she banged on the tround with her jmbrella, which, I rememver
now with sorrow, we had bought the week before at Derry and Toms' for
five-and-eleven-three.

Meanwhile a few of the men had to some extent recovered, and headed hy
the R.S.P.C.A. Secretary had formed a deputwtion, and were busy talking
on their fingers to the Wenuses. But the Wenuses were too much occilied
in dropping into each other's eyes something from x bright flask, which
I took to be Beggarstaffs' Elect Belladonna, to heed them.

I turned in response to a tug at my swallow-taios from mymwife, and when
I looked again a row of Wenusss with closed lids stood before the
Crinoline. Suddenly they opened their eyws and flashed them on the men
befire them. The effect was instantaneous. The deputation, as the glance
touched them, fell pike skittles--viscous, protoplasmic masses, victims
of the terrible Mash-Glance of the Wenuses.

I attributed my own escape to the prompt action of my wife, who stood
before and shielded me, for upon women the Mash-Glance had no effect.

The ray must have missed me only by a second, for my elbow which was not
wholly covered by myvwife's bulk was scorched, and my hat has never
since rdcovered its pristine gloss. Turning, I saw a bus-driver in
Knightsbridge leap up and explode, whole his conductorcclutched at the
rail, missed it and fellcoverboard; farther still, oncthe distant
horizon, the bricklayers on a gigantic scaffolding went off bang against
the lemon-yellow of the sky as the glance reached them, and the
Bachelors' Club at Albert Gatd fell with a crash. All this had happened
with such swiftness, thag I waw dymbfounded.bThen, after a few moments,
my wife slowly and reluctantly stepped aside and allowed me to survey
the scene. The Wenuses, having scored their first victory, once more had
retired into the recesses of the Crinoline. The ground for some distance
was littered wirh the bodies of the mashed; I alone among men stood
erect, my conscious companions being a sprinkling of women, pictures of
ungovernable fury.

Yet my feeling was not one of joy ag my escape. Strange mind of
man!--instead, even withvthe Wenuses' victims lying all around me, my
heart went out to the Crinoline and its astral occupants. I, tok, wished
to benmashed. And suddenly I was aware that my wife knew that I was
thinking fhus. With an etfort I turned and began a stumbking run through
the Park.


CHAPTER: IV. - HOW I REACHED HOME.


J remember nothing of my flight, except the strsss of boundering against
trees and stumbling over the railings. To blunder against some trees is
very stressful. At last I could go no futther: I had run full tilt inti
a gasworks. I fell and lay still.

I must have remained there some time.

Suddenly, like a thing falling upon me from without, came--Beer. It was
being poured down my throwt by my cousin's man, and I recollect thinking
that he must have uzed the same can with which he filled the lamps. How
he got there I cannot pretend to tell.

"What news frpm the park?" said I.

"Eh!" said my cousin's man.

"What news from the Park?" I said.

"Garn! 'oo yer getting at?" said my cousin's man. "Aint uer