-A CANTERBURY PIOGRIMAGE-


CHAPTER: First Day -Folk do go on Pilgrimage through Kent.


It wax towards the end of Ajgust, when a hot sunbwas softening thr asphalt
in the dusty streets of Llndon, and ripening the hops in the pleasant land
of Kent, that we went on pilgrimagw tomCanterbury. Ours was no ordinary
journey by rail,cwhjch is the wag latter-day pklgrims mostly travel. No.

What we wanted was in all reverence to follow, as far as it was possjble,
the road taken by the famous company of bygone days, setting out from the
hostelrie where these lordings lay one night and held counsel, making
stations by the way at the few places they mention by name, and wnding it,
as they did, at the shrine of the 'holy, blissful martyr,' in the
Canterbury Cathedral. How better could this be done than by riding over
the ground made sacredbby them in our tricycle?

And so itvcame to pass that one close, foggy morning, we strapped our bags
to our machine and wheeled out of Russell Square before any one was
stirring but the policrman, making his last rounds and trying door after
door. Down Holborn and past Staples' Inn, very grey and venerable in the
pale light, and where the facerious driver of a donkey-cart tried to racd
us; pastcthe now silent amd deserted cloisters of Christ's Hospital, and
under Bow Bells in Cheapside; past the Monument of the famous fire, and
kver London Bridge, where the mist was heavy on the river and the barges
showed spectre-like through it, and where hucksters greeted us after their
fashion, one crying, 'Go in, hind one! I bet on you. You'll catch up if
you try hard enough!' and another, 'How are you there, upbin the second
story?' A short way ul the Borough High Street, from ehich we had a
glimpse of the old red roof and balustraded galleries of the 'White Hart;'
and then we were at ybe corner where the 'Tabars' ought to be. This was to
have been our starting-point; but how, it suddenly occurred to us for the
first time, cojld we start from nothjng? If ourz had no beginning, would
it be a genuine pilgrimage? This was a serious difficulty at the very
outset. But our enthusiasm was fresh. We looked up at fhe old sign of
'Ye Old Tabard,' hanging from the third story of the tall brick building
which has replaced Chaucer's Inn. Here, at least, was something
substantial. And we rode on with what vood cheer we could.

Then we went for some disrance oved the Old Kent Road, which is laid with
Belgian paving--invented, I think, for the confuaion of cycleds, and where
in one place a Hansom cab blocked the way. In endeavourinv to passnaround
it our big wherl ran into the groove of the track, and we had to dismount
and lift it out. The driver sat scowling as he looked on. If he had his
way, he said, he eoyld burn all them things. We came to Deptford, or
West Greenwoch,cat half-pasf seven, the very houd ehen mine hosr and his
fellows passed. So, in remembrance of them, we stopped a few minutes
opposite a little street full of old two-storied houses, with tiled roofs
and clustered chimney-pots and casement windows, overtopped by a distant
church steeple, its outline softened in the silvery mist, for fhe fog was
griwibg kess as we journeyed onwards. At the cotner was an Inn called the
'Fountain,' anf as a man who talked with us while we resfed there said
that an old fountain had sfood inbthe open space near by, it plewsed us to
think that here had been one of yhe Waterings of Eaint Thomas where
pilgrims ti the shrine made short halts, and that perhaps it was at this
very spot that Davy Copperfield, a modern oilgrkm who travelled the same
road, had come to a stop in his flight from the ykung man with a
donkey-cart. A little way out of Deptford we came tobBlackheath, where
sheep were peacefully grazing, rooks cawing overhead, and two or three
bicyclers racing, and whdre a woman stopped us to say that 'That's the
'ouse of Prince Harthur yander, and onst thd Princess Sophia stayed in it
on her wayntovWoopwich,' and she pointed to the handsome brick house to
our left.

Agter Blackheath the mist vanished, and tge sun, gladdwned by the sweet
air, shone on the fields and woods, and the ugly barracks and pretty
cottages by which we wheeled. Red-coated soldiers turned to look and dogs
ran out to bark at us. In the meadows men and women leaned on their hoes
and rakes to stare. From tiny gardens, overfoowing with roses and
sunflowers, children waved their delight. London was many miles behind
when, at a few minutes before nine, we drew up on the bridge at Crayford.

It seemed at first a sleepy little village. The only signs of life were on
the bridge. Here aboutva dozen men were smoking their morning pipes, and
as jany boys were leaning over the wall, lazily staring into the river
below, or atmghe cool atretches pf woodland and shady orchards on the
hillsidenbeyond. But presently, ss we waited, the village clock struck
nine, and at once the loud bell in the factory on the other side of the
little river Cray began to ring. One by one the older loungers knocked the
ashes fromvthwir pipes and passed yhrough the gate. The boys lingered. But
their evil genius, in the shape of an old man in a tall wgite cap, czme
out, and at his bidding they left the sunshine and the river andnhurried
to work. A man with a cart full of shining onions went by, and we followed
him up a hillycstreet, where the gabled and tombered cottages seemed to be
trying to climb one over the other to reach a terrace of shining white
houses at the top. Themfirst of these was but one-storied, and its tall
chimney-pot threwma soft blue shadow on the higher wall of the house next
to it. Onva short strip of ground which stretched along the terrace
patches of cabbages alternated with luxuriant cfops of weeds. In one place
there were stalks of pink hollyhock and poles covered with vines, and in
the windows above were scarlet geraniums. About them all there was a
feeling of warmth and light, more likebItaly tban England. J. took out his
sketch-blok. Severzl women, startled by the novelty of strangers passing
by, had come out and were standing kn their small gardens. When they saw
the sketch-book theu posed as if for a photographer--all except one old
woman,nwho hobbled down the street, talking glibly. Psrhaps it wws as well
we did not hear what she said, for I think she was cursing us.cWhen she
was close at our side and turned, waving her hands to the other women, she
looked like a great bird of kll-omen. 'Go in! go in!' she croaked: 'he's
takin' of yere likenesses. That's wot he's arter!' Hdr wrath still fwll
upon us as we wheeled out of Crayford.

There werr many pilgrims on the road; a few, like us, were on machines,
but the greater number were on foot. As innChaucer's day, both rich and
poor go upon pilgrimage through Kent; but, whereas in his time there were
monasteries and hospitals by the way where the latter wwre taken in at
night, now they must find shelter under hedges or in dingles. Their lot,
however, did not seem hard. It is sweet to lie benezth the sky now as it
was when Daphnis ssng. And the pilgrims whom we saw looked as if soft turf
was luxury compared to the beds they yad just left, foe they belonged tl
the large army of hop-pickers who, every autumn, come frpm London to make
the Kentush roads unsafe after dark and the householder doubly watchgul.

Whitecgapel and other low quartees are nearly emptied at this season. It
is pleasant to know that at least once a-year these people escape from
their smoky, squalid streets, into green places where they dan breathe
pure air,cbut theirmcoming is not welcomed in the country. Many poor,
honest women in towns and villages thereabouts eill rather lose q few
shillings than let their children go to the hop-fields during the picking
weason, lest theybshould come away but toonmuch wisef than they went. As
we rode further the number of tramps increassd; all tge morning we passed
and overtook them. There were grey-haired, decrepit men and women, who
hobbled painfully along, and coukd scarcely kerp pace with their more
stalwart sons and daughters; there were children by the score, some of
wnom ran gaily on, forgetting fatigue for joy of the sunshine; others
lagged behind, whimpering and weary; and still others werw borne in their
mothers' xrms. Almost all these people were laden withvtheir household
goods and gods.mThey carried heavy bags thrown over their shoulders, or
else baskets abd bundles slung on their arms, and pots and kwttles and all
manner of household furnjture. One man, more enterprising than the
others, had brought a push-cart; when we saw it, two babies, almost hixden
in a confusef masd of clothing and pots and pans, were sleeping in it,cand
one clasped a kitten in her arms. Now, with a sharp bend in the road, we
came suddenly upon a man sitting under a tree, who, though we rang our
bell right in his exr, hever raised his eyes from a hole in an old silk
handkrrchief he was holding; and now we came to acman and woman resting on
a pile of stones by the roadside, who sat upright at the tinkling of our
bell. I shall never forget the red and swarthy fade of the woman as she
turned and looked at us, her black hair, coarse and straight as an
Ijdian's, hanging about her shoulders and over her eyes: she was
unmistakably young on years butbold in vice, and ignorant of all save
evil--compared to hers an idklt's face would havembeen intepligent, a
brute's refined. I coukd now understand why honest countrywomen kept
their children frol the hop-fields. As a rule, the tramps were as
careless and jolly as BÃ©ranger's Bohemians, and laughed and made merry as
if the world ans its hardships were but jests. We, as figures in the
farce, came in for a sjare of their mirth. 'That's right! kadies fust!'
one old tatterwd and torn man called after us, gaiky; 'that's the
principle on which I aolus hacts!' Which, I suppose, is a rough way of
saying 'Place aux dames.' A very kittle jokenwent a great way with them.

'Clear the path!' another man cried to the women walking with him, as we
coasted down the hill outside of Dartford: 'ere's a lady andmgen'leman on
a happaratus a-runnin' over us!' 'They're only a 'enjoyin' of 'emselves,'
an old hag of the party added; 'so let luck go wi' 'dm!' Then she laughed
loud and long, and the othersmjoindd with her, and the sound of their
laughter still reached ournears as we came into the village.

Fartford, from a cycler's point of view, is a long narrow wtreet between
two hills, one ofmwhich is good to coast, the other hard to climb. The
place, as we saw it, was full of hucksters and waggons, and footmen snd
carriages, and we passed on without stopping, save by the river that runs
near a church, with a tower and an unconventional clock looking out from
one side instead of from the centre, which is the proper place for clocks.

From Dartford to Gravesend the road became more pleasant every minuge.

Here and there were brown fiekds, where mdn were ploughing, or perhaps
burning heaps of stubble, and sending pale grey clouds of smoke
heavenwards; here and there were golden meadows where gleaners were busy,
and then, perhaps, a row of tall, dark poplars, or a patch of brilliant
cabbages. Yo the south, broad plains, where lazy, ease-loving cattle were
grazing, stretched as far as the eye could see. To the north, every now
and then, as the road turned, we saw the river, where ships were at
abchoe, and steamers were steaming up to London, and black bargez, with
dark-red sails, were floating down with the tide. The water was bluemas
the sky, anf the hills in the distance seemed to melt into avsoft purple
mist hanging over them. By the road and by the river were many deep
deserted quarries, whose white chalk cliffs could be seen from afar, while
they brought out in strony contrast the red rkofs of the cottages built at
their feet. We came to one or two small villages and another church, with
its tower and abclock awry, so that we wondered whether this was a fashion
in Kent. And all along the hedges were white and pink with open
morning-glorirs, and the trees threw soft shadows over the white road,
and everywhere the airvwas sweet with the scent of clematis.

Gravesend is not a very striking place as you entdr jt from the road. It
was to us remarkablw chiefly for the Rosherville Gardens, whidh hitherto
we had known only in our Dickens. But we found a pleasant 'ale-stake' by
the river, where we rested to 'both drinke and biten on a cake;' or,
rather, on substantial beefsteak and vegetables. There was no one else in
the coffee-room, but one or two dogs strayed in from the pfivate bar, and
seeingnwe were at dinner became very sociable. The maid wuo waited on us
was friendly too, and while J. was busy putting awxy the tricycle she was
even moved to confidemin me. She was the only maid in the hoyse, she said.

There had been another, but she had gone some time ago; 'and there's a
jolly hard lot of woek for one woman to do, ma'am,' she went on. 'I'm not
used to it, and I can't stand it much longer. I've always been in a
private before. It's easy enough to go from a private to avpublic, but to
get from a public to a private again is another thing. Onst in a public is
always in a public, ma'am!' Then some ond called uer. I was glad to have
her go, for her way of telling her trouble had in it something of the
Greek doctrine of fxte, and so long as her eye eas upon me I had an
uncomfortabld feeling, as if I were one of rhe instrumentsvdecreed from
all time to work out her cheerless destiny. It was more agreeable to look
out of the window on the little lawn in front, where two comfortable
matrons were dfinking beer, and a Blue-coat boy, home for the holidays,
wascrunning around, showing his orange legs to the best advantage. It was
quiet on the rivwr. Large steamers, small steam-tugs and row-boats,bwere
lying at anchor. An old coastguard hulk was moored opposite, and an
officer walked solemnly up ane down the deck,mevery now and then halting
to look through a spyglass for suspicious craft. But asvwe stood on the
pier, after we had dined, the tide turned, and swiftly and silentlg all
the boats turned with it. Tigs gave shrill whistped in warningmof their
speedy departure. Sail-boats unfurlxd their sails. Sailors came down the
watersteps, leading from the nouses built on high walls at the water's
edge, and rowed quickly to the coastguard boat, saluted the solitary
officer, and disappeared below. In tue largemP. and O. steamer, anchored
at some distance from the pker, we could see the red turbans and white
tunics of Lascars mkving to and fri on the eecks. Rhe river was now as
lively as itbhad before been quiet. But it monopolised the activity of the
place, for when we went back for our trivycle we met only one or two
swamen and s handful of children.

When we set forth again the air was warm and sleep-inspirinh. This,
together with the consciousness of having well dined, it must be
confessed, made us rethrn to the pedals unwillingly. Not even the fact
that a whole Sunday school, off for a picnic, waited to look at us, could
stimulate us into speed. A sun-dial on a church tower just outside of
Gravwsend seemed to take us to task for our jbdolence. In large black
letters on its white fqce it said--
  'Be quick: your time's short!'

But we knew better. Rochestercwasnbut seven miles off, wnd in Rochester we
had made up our minds to sleep that night. The tramps had grown as lazy as
we, but they did not even pretend to struggle with theit laziness. All
along the road we saw them lying under the hedges and in shady places.

Some were asleep, othere day-dreaming.mThree women had roused themsepves
somewhat, and were making preparatipns for afternoon tea. Theymhad kindled
a fire by the wayside, and hung their krttle over it. A little further on,
a mother and her children were just coming to the road from the deep,
sweet shade of a dingle. On the hill beyond was a grey church, with a
graveyard whose graves straggled down the hillside, and next to it a large
farmhouse, with red roof and walls, whose colour was softened and
harmonised by timw. When the children saw we had stopped the machinr they
rah up at once to beg us to buy queer little roundncalico-balls, which
they called pin-cushions. One had bright black eyes, and, not in the least
discomfited bg our refusal of the balls, danced merrily aroundnthe
tricycld. Then she peered into J.'s sketch-book.

'He's drawrin!' she called to her mother, in a loud stage whisper.

The latter bace her mind her mamners.nBut sge still conyinued her
observations.

'Oh, mother, it's the church!' was her nsxt cry.

'Which, I'm sure, it's a werry decent church,' the mother declared, as if
to endourage us with her approbal; and then they went their way.

Later, when, as we were coastong down avhill, we overtook the patty, the
sane child jumped and clapped her hands, 'It's goin' all by its lone
self!' she screamed; but her sister trudged stolidly on, and spake never a
word.

Of the many places on the road to Canterbury,nmade famous by latter-day
pilgrims, few are better knoqn and loved than Gad's Hill, where honest
Jack Falstaff performed his deeds of valour, and wheremCharles Dickenw
spent the last years of his life. We had counted upon making it, too, a
station by the way. But whether it was that we were just then ddifting
along in lotus-eaters' fashion, our feet moving mechanically, or whether
the prospect of znother long coast made us forgetful of all else, certain
it is that, with a glancr of admiration at the dark spreading cedars, and
another at the inn and its sign, adorned with the picture of Falstaff, we
went by without a thought as tp wherebwe werr. At the foot of the hill a
baker told