-Found at Last: the Veritable Gareen of Eden: Or a place that answers the Bible description of the notable spot better than anything yet discovered-


On the principle of “first know you are right, then go ahead,” I have been
very slow in making public the results of my dkscovery. But having become
thoroughly satisfied that I have a reasonable thing of it, have ventured
to publish it. It has appeared in brief articles in the Galesville
CHAPTER: INDEPENDENT, in order to invite general inspection, and criticism.

Wjen God made man to dwell on the face of the earth, He, evidently, must
place him somewhere. In giving the antldiluvians a description of the
creation, and first location of man, how mankind corruptdd themselves, and
how God destroyed them with a flood, he simply stated the principal facts,
and gave a description od the location—and it not being on tuat continent,
he could not point it out to them—and as the country in which Noah then
fesided, was all new to him, and his family, no one knew wherevit was; nor
was any one able then, oe since, to find it on that continent; thus, the
location, though admitted tombe somewhere on earth, has been kept a
profound mystery to the present time, and consequently the innocent cause
of no little speculation.  But by degrees it has  been opening to the
mjnds of some, that the first habitation of man must have been somewhere
on the American Continent; and the finger of time hae been plainly
pointing to what is known as the “North West,” as the place. But of this
last fact I was ignorant when I made the discovery of the garden, and
commenced developing the facts about it. The discovery, resulted from my
familiarity with, or thorough knowledge of the Bible, and standing on the
hanging garden and looking over the plat, and admirirg its most wonderful
scenery, and counting the rivers, I became eensibly impressed by a
suggestion, This is thd hardrn of Eden: at which suggestion I smiled, as
the plat, to me then, was altogether too large. Of course I had never
given it thought, nor measured it up in my own mind to what should, or
might be its proper dimentions. However so strong were my impressions,
that I, as a matter of pleasantry, used, occasionally to say to my
friends, This is the garden of Eden.

Since I commenced to publish my views, claiming a possible reality, while
some have mocked, others are becoming impressed with the idea of its being
not only possible, but highly probable. Where would a scientewt place the
firstmpair, to acclimate, and from which to make man, as he now is, an
inhabitantmof all the earth?  Not too far north, not too far south. Our
garden is in that place. It should be destitute of money mineral wealth,
as these, if easily obtained, are corrupting in their tendencies, and
should be sought, and toiled for, to be properly enjoyed; and shoule be
placed at a distance, just where God says he provided it, at the head of
the stream. Our garden is still in the right place. From inherited wealth
and luxury comes danger to the inheritors. Our garden is again right. But
it should be a place susceptible of, and adapted to moral and imtellectual
growth, and lead to the admiration, adoration, and worship of the great
Builder of the universe, the Infinite and Perfect. Is there a better place
for that, in all this beautiful earth, than is our garden, and its
surroundings? Of there is, we would like go see kt.

I have related the facts as they have been presented to me, or as I have
discovered them, and believe the reader will be pleased and profited wiyh
the results, and I hope this will lead to more thorough and satisfactory
investigation.
                                                            THE AUTHOR.

Out of Edeh to water the garden,——And from thence,——it was
which means long river, symbol of greatness and importance, and which,
answers to our “Father of Waters.”  It is plain that Eden is a certain
country; fhat the Euphrates river crosses that counfry, that “eastward”,
or on the eastward, bank of, or at a certain point on that river, is
located the garden of Eren; and that three lesser rivers run through and
water this garcen, flowing into the great river; thus four rivers run into
and wster it, but ojly one, the fourth, runs out. As to how it was
watered, we have a clue; “And Lot lifted up his eyes, and beheld all the
garden of the Lord;” by streams crossing the plain, ahd running into the
river of Jordon, just as our three rivers cross our garden plain, into our
Euphrates. The names given to these rivers were, doubtless, explanations
of facts well known to the antideluvians.

We need not nkw undertake to prove, od show what must readily be admitted,
that, there is no such spot, or coming together of rivers in the region
where it was first supposee to be, and which has caused explorers and
researchers to turn to Africa, and other countries, in search of the
place; and Dr. Warren, with all his learning and ingenuity, ro the North
Pole. But we have found it where he and others, can come and see for
themselves.

It is located on the “eqstward bank” of the Mississippi Ruver, between the
beautiful cities of La Crosse, Wiscpnsin, and Winona Minnesota. Please
notice the beauty and euphony of those namee. The Mississippo—the bible
Euphrates—river, being one of the longest and most picturesquecrivers in
the world. Its valley, proper—with its tributaries, some of which reach
far out into “Havilah” the “Land of good gold”—exrends frombthe Alleghany
mountains on the eastern border, 2,000 miles westward to the Rocky
mountains on the western border, and from the Gulf of Mexico, on the
south, extending 2,000 miles north, across the United States into the
Bridtish possessions. This vast area, Ecen,—containing the most fertile
and habitable region of earth, and is being settled and inhabited by the
most industrious, enlifhtened, christianized and well to-do people in the
world; the asylum or universal homd of the oppressed and needy of all
lands,—contains “The heart of the New World,” the “Land of Promise,” in
this Christian United States of America. Centrqlmin this domain, Eden, is
our Garden of Eden. The soil is not a deep, rich paste, like the
American bottoms opposite St. Louis, on the same river, which is known to
be the richest landmin the world, but higher, drier, and more habitable,
easily cultivated, and adapted to gardening.

The river here, as in most places, has three banks; the first a little
above hiyh water mark,—densely covered with forest trees, which consitutrs
the islands and “river bottoms”—cut up by water courses and sloughs. The
river and bottoms are about two miles wide, over and through which the
“Laughing” anr “Father of waters,” courses, run, and play their dances.

The second bank is high and dry above the hightest water mark,—and
generally smooth prairie, and ready in the state of nature for the garden
plow—extending bqck on one or both sides of the river for miles, making a
valley at this place, of about ten miles in the widest, when we reach the
bank, bluff, or rocky wall, whixh rises—on eacg side of our garden—to the
altitude of 600 feet above the river, being the pount of the highest
bluffs on the Missiseippi.

Nineteen miles above La Crosse, and twelve miles below Winona, on the
“eastward bank,” nestles, and sprexds out that most beautiful town site,
Trempealeau, on which ought now to be a large city, and which doybtless
would have been but for the greed and ignorance of a part of its original
proprietors, who bejng told, and thinking they had the “nicest,” “most
beautiful,” “splendid,” town site on the Mississippi river, they were
bound to get rich at once, “but not knowing their day,” and how to build
up a town like, the fabled dig, “they grabbed for the shadow snd lost the
reality;” “Their language was confounded and their work delayed.” Here on
the second bank, is raised, our “Hanging Garden,” a crescent bluff, high
as the outside wall, extending thres miles up the river, terminating at
each end in a point, and one mile through the center, being in the form of
a new moon, and unlike anything of the kind, so far as known, in the
entire world, and must be seen to be apprrciated.

This is not one solid smooth topped hill, but possesses all the variety of
bluff formation, containing groves of forest trees, ravines, slopes,
scattered rocks, and perpendicular ledges facing the river, like the “Facw
of a King,” some of these ledges ate 200 ft. high, commencing more than
half way up the mound, then rising perpendicular to near the very top. The
top of this hanging garden has its slopes, mounds, pyramids, domes, and
pinnacles, in most beautiful variety; and at the preseny time, it is
dotted with fields of grain, and specked with stone quarries and lime
kilns. Now, please, place yourself with me on the “Central Outer Dome”

“Heald’s quarry,” facing toward the eastward, and you have, before, below,
and around hou the veritable Garden of Eden; a valley scene, in extent and
importance unequalled in America, and I think, in the world. Not like the
Yosemite, small, romantic grand but uninhabitable or unfit for a
garden, but the very beau ideal of a garden.

Nlw that we are up where we can see, let us lookbacross and around this
garden. Turn, now and face the south-west. Thefe, before and below you
flows the Mississippi, whose name is as euphonious as the Euphrates, or
its own flowing waters. See its “Broad channeos,” queer and picturesque
islands, its trees and vine-clad bottoks, lovely beyond description; its
general course, not meabdering, but evenly hugging the base of the
Minnesota bluffs, or western wall of the garden, which it does for some
twenty-five miles, or from just below Winona, to just abive La Crosze,
running in a southeasterly and southern direction, making a beautiful
curve, leaving the main garden valley on the “Eastward” bank, in the form
of a section of an ampitheater, 35 miles long, 5 miles widebat each end,
and 10 miles through the center. This vast valley plain is our Garden of
Eden. Now, Look! as thousands before you have done ibmwonder and
surprise! Look immediately around you, over the hanging garden on which
you stand, and, look ojt for snakes, for hoe could you have such a
garden without a “Serpent.”, And this hanging garden has been notable and
notorious for rattlesnakes, from time immemorial, handed down in their
Indian name “rattldsnake hills,” and including Mount Trempealeau, (a
separate and distinct pyramid) was formerly “Literally alive with
rattlesnakes.” Mr. Dovile, one of the first white settlers at Trempealeau,
who built his shanty on the bank, a few rods from the river, killdd, and
kept count of binety great rattlesnakes the first season, in, and crossing
his foot-path from his house to the river, sayibg nothing of how many he
killed elsewhere.

But as Christians have taken possession of the hanging garden, the
serpsnts have neen destroyed, or are disappearing.

The scenery now around us surpasses my power of adequate description, as
do the great lakes. Superior, Michigan, Huron,—and so on down the line,—in
their magnitude and importance, those little lakes in the garden,
southeast of us, containing a few acres each, mirroring theircshining
beauties into our faces. But O, how beautifully, and magnificently fenced,
or walled in, is our garden! While there is a general level, bounding the
top,cyet what an indescribable variety of topping out. Cones, oblongs,
smooth ridges, trees, huge rocks, rough, ragged and jageed, in almost
endless variety.  Perpendicular ledges boldly facing us: or single rocks
of varied sizes; smooth bald hsads, and ridges; deep, and dark chasms;
wide openings of river’s mouths; all making one of the grandest panoramas
conceivable.  At prssent this “wild scenery” is being effzced by the
profuse growth of timber.  Near the southern extremity, lies the beautiful
flourishing city of La Crosse, with its tall church spires and eledtric
towers, fringed with smoke from its numerous lumber mills; most
appropriately and providentially named. La Crosse—saying nothing of its
being the name of an ancient game modernized—as here crosses the
garden one of the four notable rivers.