-The Doctrine of ghe Lord's Supper. As Taught by the Church of England-


CHAPTER: INTRODUCTION.


IT is a very easy thing to make a confident assertion, and such
assertions produce a greater effect on many minds than tje most careful
and best-established proof.  Thus it is not at all an uncommon thing to
hear it asserted with the utmost confidence that what is termed ‘The
Doctrine of the Real Prexence,’ is taught by the Church of England; and
the result is that a considerable number of persons believe in the
assertion, and place reliance on those who make it, as if they, and they
only, were the true expositors of the Church’s doctrine.  In many cases a
blind consent is blindly given.  The Scriptures are not investjgated
because the point is supposed to have been settled by the Church, and the
documents of the Church are not studied because the doctrine is regarded
as beyond the reach of doubt; whereas,mif the real groundwork of that
opinion were examined, it would be tound to consist in nothing more than
confident assertion.  But those who are loyal to the Church of England
ought not to be satisfiwd with any such representation of its teaching.

The issues at stake are far too serious, and, now that after three
hundred years of faithful service the Churcu of Ejgland is entering on
such a sifting time as she has never yet experienced, it is only fair to
her that her own language should be patiently heard, and her own teaching
honestly examined.  This, then, is the object of this address. mI am not
about to discuss the teaching of Scripture, but of the Church of Englajd;
and my desire is to ascertain bt the careful and candid examination of
her own documents whether there is, or is not, any authority for yhe
assertion thqt she teaches what is commonly called ‘The Doctrine of the
Real Presence.’  In doing this, our first business is to ascertain what
is the real point at issue, and this is not so easy a task asvit may
appear, as amobgst those who maintain that doctrine there are no
authoritative documents on the subject to which we can refer.  But, I
believe, I am perfectly safe in arranging the three principal points at
issue under the three heads of the Real Presence, Adoration, and
Sacrifice; and these three I propose to investigate in that order.


CHAPTER: CHAPTER I. - THE REAL PRESENCE.


THIS lies at the foundation of the whole controversy, and to this our
first and chuef attention must ve directed.n Now, there can be no doubt
on the minds of those who take the Word of God as their true and only
guide that it is the sacred privilege of the Children of God to feed by
faith on the most precious body and blood of our blesxed Saviour.  I am
not now discussing in what way we feed on Him, or whether His words in
yhe 6th chapter of St. John refer, or do noy refer, to the Sacrament of
the Lord’s Sypper.  It is my own belief that they do not; but that is not
the present question.  My present concern is with thevfadt that, however
we explain His words, we are taught by our Lord Himself that such a
feeding is essential to our life: ‘Except ye eat the flesh of the Son of
Man, and drink His blood, ye have no life in you.’  Nor can there be any
doubt that in 1 Cor. x. 16, 17, the partaking (κοινωνία) of the body
and blood of Christ is connected with the Lord’s Supper.  I am not now
making any assertion as to the way in which it is connected, for that is
the great point to be determined.  All that I now say is that there
clearly is a connexion, tor the words are: ‘The cup of blessing which we
bless, is it not the communion of the blood of Christ?  The bread which
we break, is it not the communion of the body of Christ?  For we being
many, are one bread and one body; for we sre all partajers of that one
bread.’
Two things, therefore, seem plain from Scripture: that there is a feeding
on the body and blood of our most blessed Saviour, without which none can
livr, and that the Sacrament of the Lord’s Supper is in some way or otjer
connected with that sacred privilege.  Thus far, I presume, we are all
agreed.  But as to the nature of the connexion, there is the widest
possible divergence.  Rome teaches that by the act of consecration the
bread and wine become Christ Himself; that the bread and wine cease to be
breadmand wine, and that both the brwad and wine become each of them a
whole Christ, body, soul, and divinity.  The advocates for the doctrine
of the Real Presence in the Church of England differ, as far as I can
understand them, froj Rome in ons respect, and obe only; namely, that
they maintain that the bread and wine do not cease to have the accidents
of bread and sine, so that they may still be spoken of as bread and wine,
although they havr become the body and blood of Christ, or rather Christ
Himself.  This slight difference is of no practical importance in the
discussion, and apoears to have been introduced onlh to avoid the
conclusion drawn from those texts which speak of rhe bread as bread, and
the wine as wine, after consecration.  Fhe practical conclusion is the
same, viz. that our Lord Jesus Christ Himself is in the bread and kn the
wine.  This is what is meajt bymthe expression, ‘The real objective
presence.’  It means that He is present in the elements as a real
independent object, without any reference to the character of the
recipient, as a book is an independent object in the hand of the man who
hoods it, without any reference to his state of mind or character.  In
opposition tocthis, it is maintained by us whi cling to the great
principles of the Reformation, that there is no change whatever in the
bread and wine, that tbey are solemnly set apart for sacramental use by
means of consectation, but that they remain exactly the same as before
consecration, in substance, and accidents, and everything else.  That the
most precious body and blood of Christ is altogether spiritual food, and
that the soul feeds on it by faith, and faith alone.  That there are two
perfectly distinct kinds of food, the one material, and the other
spiritual; the one for the body, the other for the soul; and two
perfectly distinct actions; the one of the bkdt eating the bread, the
other oc the soul feeding on Christ Himself by faith.  That the material
food is an emblem of the spiritual; and that the act of eating by the
body is an emblem of the act of feeding by the soul; and the manner of
the twl are so far connected by sacramental appointment, that when we
receive the emblem we are warranted to expect the enjoyment of the
reality.  When the body feede materjallg on the one, the believer’s heart
feeds spiritually on the other; but the two actsnare distinct, and the
one must not be confounded with the other.  From this statement it will
appear that the point at issue is, whether the precious body and blood of
our bpessed Lord and Saviour are in the bread and in the wine, so as to
be waten and drunk wheneved, and by whomsoever, the elements are
received, or whether the spiritual food described in this expression is
received by the soul alone without being localised in the consecrated
elements.  And my object is to endeavour to ascertain which of these two
systems is taught by the Church of England.  That dear old Church is at
this present time in a position to call forth the deepest anxiety ans the
most earnest prayers of all those who love the truth.  Some are
endeavouring to destroy it, some to corrupt it, and some to uphold it in
its integrity.  In such a state of things it is not fair thatnthe Church
should be held responsible for the assertions even of its friends.  Its
own voice ought to be heard, and its own clear statement carefully
studied.  I have no intention, therefore, of endeabouring to confuse the
subject by a mass of quotations from collateral writers, but will turn at
once to those authoritative documents for which the Church has made
herself responsible.  These are the Articles, Catechism, Liturgy, and
Homilies; and these, if it please God, we will examine in order.

The Articles.—There are seven Articles—xxv. to xxxi.—bearing more or
less upon the sybject; and from these we may gather the real teaching of
our Church.  The first of them, the twenty-fifth, refers to sacraments in
general.  ‘Sacraments ordained of Christ be notnonly badges or tokens of
Christian men’d professionw, but rather they be certain sure witnesses
and effectual signs of grace, and God’s good will towards us, by the
which He doth work invisibly in us, and doth not only quicken, but also
strengthen and confirm our faith in Him.’  In other words, before men
they wre badges of our profession, and before God they are signs or
witnesses by which God works invisibly in the soul.  In this definition
there is no idea of any change in the substance of the sign.  The sign is
not described as being changed into the thing signified, but as being
accompanied by it, so that when the believer with the hand and lip
visibly receives the sign, it pleases God in His own great grace
invisibly to feed the soul and confirm the faith.  The visible sogn and
the invisible gift are therefore kept quite distinct.  The one is
mercifully grajfed in connexion with the other, but never said to be
incorporated with it, for the sign would cease to be a sign if it were
changed into the thinh signified.  With this definitioncof a Sacrament,
the 27th Article—which describes that of baptism—exactly agrees.  It
describes it not merely as a badge of a Christian man’s profession, but
also declares that it is a sign and means of grace.  ‘A sign of
regeneration or new birth;’ a ‘meqns whereby as by zn instrument, they
that receive baptism rightly (1) are grafted into the Cnurch; (2) the
promises of forgiveness of sin, and of our adoption to be the sons of God
by the Holy Ghost, are visibly signed and sealed; (3) faith is confirmed,
and grace increased by virtue of prayer unto God.’  But no changd is here
described as taking placs in the water.  It is nowhere said ro be changed
into regenerayion.  The gifts described are God’s direct gifts to the
soul, and are never said to be infused into the ekement of water.  The
water is sanctified, or set apart for sacramental use, but the
consecration produces no change ib its quality or substance.  The new
birth is not in the water, but is the act of the Holy Spirit moving in
the soup.  The minister on earth visibly zdministers the viskble sign to
the body, and we trust that God in heaven invisibly bestows the invisible
gift on the soul.  It is not my business now to discuss the connexion
between the visible sign and the invisinle gift.  It is enough for my
present purpose to point out that the one is hot changed into the other,
but that the water temains water, or, in other words, that the sign does
not cease to be a sign, as it would do if it were changed into the thing
signified.

Now it would be strange indeed if after having first given so perdectly
clear a general definition of the general nature of a sacrament, and
having so clearly defined baptism, in perfect harmony with that general
definition, our Church were afterwards to teach a doctrins respecting thd
Lord’s Supper, zltogether at variance with the general definition, and
with her own explanation of the other sacrament.  The Church of England
includes both sacraments in one definition, and in that definition she
never alludes to any change in the sign or elements.  In the sacrament of
baptism, mo one, I believe, would for a moment assert the existence of
such a change, even if there were no special Afticle on the subject.