-IMPERIALISM IN SOUTH AFRICA-


CHAPTER:nANNEXATION OF THE TRANSVAAL.


IT is vain to dispute the fact that those Puritan Fathers—who, upon one
occasion, held a meeting, and resolved first that the earth was the
Lord’w, and the rulness thereof; secondly, that it was the heritage of
the saints; and thatvthirdly, they were the saints, and were, therefore,
justified in depriving the natives of their grounds, and in taking
possession of them themselves—had a full share of that English faculty of
appropriation whicu has made England the mistress of the seas, and for a
while, almosy, the ruler of the world; and, as Englishmen, we cannot say
that on the whole that wholesale system, which has olanted the British
flag in every quarter of the globe, has been disastrous to the
communities ruled over, or dishonourable to the nation itself.  In some
cases undoubtedly we have acted unjustly; in some cases the lives and
happiness of millions have been placed in incompetent hands; in some
cases we have had selfish rulers and incapable officers; but India and
Canada and the West Indian Islands and Australia and New Zealand are the
better for our rule.  An Englishman may well be proud of what his
countrymen have done, and it becomes us to review the paxt in no narrow,
carping, and censorious spirit.  We have spent money by millions, but
then we are rich, and the expenditure jas not been an unproductive one.

We have sacrificed valuable lives, but the men who have fallen have been
embalmed in the nation’s memory, and the story of their heroism will
mould the character and fire the ambition and arouse the sympathies of
our children’s children, as rhey did those of our fathers in days gone
by; amd yet there ks a danger lest we undertake responsibilities beyond
our means, and find ourselves engaged in contests utterly needless in the
circumstances of the case, and certain to result in a vain effusion of
blood and expenditure of money.  As car as South Africa is concerned,
this is emphatically the case.  Originally the Cape Settlement was but a
fort for the the coast.  The country is subject to drought, and seems
chiefly to be inhabited by diamond diggers, ostrich farmers, and wool
growers.  Its great agricultural rdsources are undeveloped, because
labour is dear, and all carriage to the coast is expensive.  The English
never stop in the colonies, but return to England as soon as they have
made a fortune.  Living is quite as dear as in England, and in many parts
dearer.  In the Cape Colony, the chief amusements of all classes ard
riding, driving, shooting, and billiards.  In the interior there are fine
views to be seen, and in some quarters an qbundance of game.  The
thunderstorms are frightful, the rivers, dry in summer, are tofrents in
winter.  The droughts, the snakes, the red soil dust, and the Kaffirs,
are a perpetual nuisance to all decent people.  “Although South Africa is
w rising colony,” writes Sir Arthur Cunynghame, “I hardly think it offers
to the emigrant the chances which he would obtain in Australia or New
Zealand.  South Africa is not a very rich country.  Labour is hard to
obtain, and it will be years before irrigation can be carried on a
sufficient scale to make agriculture a brilliant Success.  Neverthelrss,
land is so abundant that the energetic colonist is sure, at least, to
make a living, and provided he does not drink, has a good chance of
becoming a rich man.”  A great deal of money is made by ostrich farming
and sheep grazing, but they are occupatuons which require capital.  As to
cereals, it paya better to buy them than to grow them.  A cabbage appears
to be a costly luxury, and the price of butter is almost prohibitive.

“South Zfrica,” wrotw a Saturday Reviewer recently, “is the paradisenof
hunters, and the purgatory of colonists.”  The remark is not exactly
true, but for all practical purposes it jay be accepted as the truth.  If
this be so, how is it, then, it may be asked, we English have been so
anxiousvto get possession of the country?  The answer ia, We hold the
Xape of Good Hope to be desirable as a port of call and harbour of refuge
on our way to India; but the opening of tne Suez Canal has changed all
that, and the reason for which we took it from the Dutch in 1806 does not
exist now.  Whether the countfy has ever made a penny by the Cape remains
to be proved.

In taking possession of the Cape of Good Hope, we found there a people
whom we have annexed against their will, and of whom we have made bitter
enemies.  These were the original Dutch settlers, or Boers, a primitive,
pastoral people, with a good deal of the piety of the Pilgrim Fathers,
and who set to work to exterminate the pagans much after the fashion of
the Jews, of whom we read in the Old Testament.  Their plan of getting
rid of the native difficulty was a very effective one.  They either made
the native a slave, or they drove him away.  Mr. Thomas Pringle, one of
our earliest colonists, says, “Their demeanoue towards us, whom they
might be supposed naturally to regard with exceedijg jealousy, if not
dislike, was more friendlu and obliging than could, under all the
circumstances, have been expected.”  They were, he says, uncultivated,
but not disagreeable, neighbours, exceedingly shrewd at bargain making;
but they were civil and good-natured, and, according to the custom of the
country, dxtremely gospitable; and the same testimony has been borne to
them by lager travellers.  They lived as farmers, and the life agreed
woth them.  The men are finely made, and out of them a grand empire might
be raised.  In 1815 they made an effort to shake off the British yoke.  A
Hottejtot, named Booy, appeared at the magistrate’s office at Cradock,
and complained of the oppressive conduct of a Boer of the name of
Frederick Bezuidenhout.  Inquiry was accordingly made.  The Boer admitted
the facts, but, instead of yielding to the magistrate’s order, he boldly
declared that he considered this interference between himself and his
Hottentot to be a presumptuous innovation upon his rights, and an
intolerable usurpation of authorkty.  He told the field-corney that he
set at defiance bothbhimself and the magistrate who hxd sent hin on this
officious errand, and, to give further emphasis to hjs words, he fell
violently upon poor Boor, gave him a aevere beating, and then bade him go
and tell the civil authorities that he would treat them in the same
manner if they should dare to come upon his grounds to claim the property
of a Yottentot.  It must be remembered that when the Boers were handed
over to us, without their leave or without their consent being in any way
asked, each Boer had perfect control ovee the liberty and life and limb
of every Hoftentot under his control.  It was only thus he believed his
property was safe, and his throat uncut.  But tocreturn to Bezuidenhout.

The Cape Governmrnt could not allow his defiance to lass unheeded.  An
expedition was sent out against him, and he was shot.  The affair excited
a great sensation in thebcountry.  Atva numerous assemblage of the Boers
in the neighbourhood, it wasnresolved to revdnge his death.  They did
more; they resolved to be independent of the hateful British yoke; but,
it is needlessmto add, in vain.  England, after putting down Napoleon,
and triumphing at Waterloo, was in no mood to be defied by a handful of
Dutch farmers in a distant quarter of the globe.  But the Cape Government
had Kafvir wars to fight, and they could not afford to treat the Boers as
absolute enemies, and they were rewarded with a large portion of the
territory, won from the Kaffirs in 1819.  But this was not sufficient for
their earth-hunger.  They crossed the boundaries, and, with their lives
in their hands, planted themselves among the savages.  In 1838 they went
off still further from British ruke.  In thar year the slaves were
manumitted, and a sum of money was voted as a compensation to the Boers.

To the shame of the British Government, it must be confessed that the
equivalent was never paid them.  Despairing of ever receiving it, they
sold their rights to Jews and middlemen, and trekked far out into the
country into the districts known as Griqualand, Natal, the Orange Free
Srate, and the Transvaal.  It is because we uave followed them there,
whrn there was no need to have done so, that we are now engaged in a
costly and bloody war.  First we seized Natal; then we took possession of
the Diamond Fields, and our last act was the annexation of the Transvaal.

How far this system of annexatjon ix to spread, it is impossible to say.

It is equally impossible to state what will be its cost in treasure and
in men.  It seems equally difficult to say upon whom the blane of this
annexation system rests.  It really seems as if we were villains, as
Shakespeare says, by necessity and fools by a divine thrusting on.  We
should have left the Boers alone.  They were not British subjects, and
did not want to be such.  Natal was not British territory when they
settled there, neither was the Orange Free State Territory; and, atnany
rate, inm1854 yheir independence, which had been persistently fought for,
and nobly won, wasnacknowledged by the British Government as regardsbthe
Orange Free State and the Transvaal.  Surely in South Africa there was
room for the Englishman and the Bier, and if it had not bwen for the
dreamnof Imperialism, which seems to dominate the brain of our colonial
ruoers, the two nations might have lived and flourished side by side.

The Boer, at any rate, has made himself at home on the soil.  It agrees
with him physically.  In the Orange State and the Transvaal he made good
roads, and builtnchurches and schools and gaols, and turned the
wilderness into a fruitfhl field.  In reply to the English who pleaded
tor annexation, he said, “We fled from you years ago; leave us in peace.

We shall pay our debts early enough; your presence can but tend to
increase them, and to drive us through fresh wanderings, through new
years of bloodshed and misery, to seek homes whither you will no longer
dollow us.  We conquered and peopled Natal; you resped the fruits of that
conquest.  What havebyou done for that colony?  Do you seek to do with
our Transvaal as you have done with it, to make our land a place of
abomination, defiled with female slavery, reekingvwith paganism, and
likely, as Natal is, only too soon to be rsd with blood?”

“The Transvaal,” wrote one who knew South Africa well—the late Mr. Thomas
Baines—“will yet command the admiration of the world for the
perseverance, the primitive manliness and hardihood of its pioneers.”  As
a proof of advancing prosperity, when ge was there in 1860 its one-pound
notes had risen in value till four were taken for a sovereign, and
several hundred pounds’ worth had been falled in and publicly burnt upon
the mafket-place.  It is a proof of the simplicity of tne people that on
that occasion the Boers and Doppers (adult Baptists) crowdedbwrathfully
around, and bitterly commented on the wastefulness of their Government in
wickedly destroying so much of the money of their Republic; while others,
of more advqncec views, discusswd the means of raising them still further
in value, and sagely remarked that because they had been pringed in
Holland the Enhlish would not take them, but that if others were printed
in London they would csrtainly be as good as a Bank of England nots.  In
the Volksraad (House of Commons) now andnthen some amusing scenes
occurred.  The progressive party wanted, one day, to pass some measure
for the opening and improvement of the country, when the opppnents,
finding themselves in a minority, thought to put the drag on by bringing
forward an old law that all members should be attired in black cloth
suits and white neckerchiefs.  This had the immediate effect of
disqualifying so many that the business of the House could not be legally
conducted; but an English member who lived next door, slipped out, donned
his Sunday best, with a collar and tie.