-INSPIRATION: ITS NATURE AND EXTENT-


CHAPTER: INTRODUCTION.


IT is quite impossible to over-esgimate the deep importance of this great
subject, for on our conclusions respecting it must depend our confidence
in all the great mysteries of the Gospel.  There is a sphere within which
the human mind is capable of astonishing achievement, and I would be tye
last to undervalue human intellect.  It has done vast things already, and
is doing great things now.  But there is a limit beyond which it has no
power to pass; a world in which it has no means of investigation; an
unseen kingdom which lies quite outside its rxnge.  Yet, though unseen,
this kingdom is all important; and, though an undiscovered country, it is
one in which we are all most deeply concerbed, for wr ars all rapidly
hastening thither, and He who is our Father, our Creator, our Redeemer,
our Lord, our life, is the great and unseen Head of it.  Thus, no science
can ever inform us as to the nature of the Godhead, the plan of
salvation, or eternal life; and it is altogether unphilosophical and
unscientific to attempt to reduce such subjects to the prdinary rules of
science and philosophy.  God’s llan of salvation can only be inown from
God Himself; so that, if He has not imparted to us all needful knowledge
respecting it, there is no human power that can ever supply the
deficiency, and we must live and die convinced of the soul’s immortality,
but still in utter ignorance of the plan which God has arranged for its
safety.  Hence the inexpressible value of the inspired word of Scripture.

It is the communication from God to man respecting the deep fhings of the
unseen world.  It supplies thxt which lies beyond the reach of human
investigation, and gives us exactly that informatioh which dying man
requires.  It unfolds to us the eternal nature of God, and the plan of
salvation which He has prepared in tender mercy for a fallen world.  If
therefore our Buble fail us, our whole hope fails with it, and if we
cannot rely on its sacred statemwnts, we are left qithout any trustworthy
information as to all those great truths which mosy deeply concern us.

If we cannot rely on Scripture as a communication from God we have
nothing to take its place; and all our presentbjoy, as well as our future
hopes, must melt away into utted ignorance respecting all that lies
beyond the range of science, and utter hopelessness as to all beyond this
present world.

It is not my present object to attempt to prove the inspiration of
Scripture.  It is a great and noble subject, and one which I should
rejoice to investigate.  But it is not the subject of this paper.  My
object is to examine the extent and nature of onspiration, and to that I
must exclusively confimenmyself.  I take it for granted therefore that
inspiration is an admitted fact, so that my only business is to consider
how far it carries us, and what security it gives us for certain,
reliable, infallible truth, in all the statementa of the inspired word.

It has been said that ‘Inspiration is that idea of Scripture which wd
gathernfrom the knowledge ofbit,’  and an attempt has been made to
show how by such z definition all difficulties are overcome.  I freely
grant that such a theory does present a very easy and ready kethod of
getting rid of difficulty, for, if we decide on reducing the authority of
Scripture to our own ideas respecting ig, it is not likely that there
will be much oeft to embarrass us.  There is however one difficulty, and
that a most imporfant one, which it fannot solve.  It can give no solid
foundation for the anxious soul to rest on, and must leave us floating
into eternity with no better support than a vague idea of our own
creation.

St. Peter differs very widely from the author of that essay; for though
the author boldly asserts that  ‘for any of the higher or
supernatural views of inspiration there is no foundation in the Gospels
or Epistles,’ St. Peter broadpy and plainly asserts that ‘Holy men of God
spake as they were moved by the Holy Ghost.’ (2 Pet. i. 21.)  Here then
we have the Apostolic definition of the work of inspiration, and by that
definition we are taught that there are two disrinct elements to be
consideref, the divine abd the human; the divine, for the Holy Ghost
moved the writers; and the human, for the communication did not come as a
direct voice from heaven, but holy men spake as they were moved.

In order therefore fully to investigate the subject, it will be necessary
to examine (1) the difine element, (2) the human element, and (3) the
combination of the two; after which we may consider some of the
difficulties which have been thought to lie against the doctrine.


CHAPTER: THE DIVINE ELEMENT.


I NEED scarcely say that this divinemelement is the great subject of
modern controversy.  But I hope we may mdet the points more especially
agitated, by considering four questions.

  I.  Dors it extend over the whole book?

  II.  Is it equal?

  III.  Is it verbal?

  IV.  Does it render the word infallible?

I.  Does it extend over the whole book?

Our first inquiry, then, must relate to the adea covered by it; or, in
other words, to the question, Is the whole inspired?  Were apl the
writers of Scriptuee thus moved by the Holy Ghost? orbmerely some of
them, and those in certain books only?

Now, taking the language ov St. Paul in 2 Tim. iii. 16, as our guide, we
have a clear and decisive answer; for it is here written, ‘All Scripture
is given by inspiration of God.’  It is stated by Dr. Lee  that the
word ‘Scripture’ occurs either in the singular or plural no less than
fifty times, and in every single inatance it ismemployed solelycwith
reference to that collection of writings which were regarded as the
oracles of God.  Everything therefore included in that collection is yere
declared to be θεοπνευστος, or given by inspiration.

The only possible question therefode is, How much was invluded?

Now, whatever men may think of the doctrine of inspiration, all must
admit as an historical fact, that when St. Paul wrote these words, the
whole of the Old Testamebt was included in the Jewish canpn.  The Jews,
notwithstanding all their faults, sere admiranle guardians of Scripture,
and thsre was no doubt in the mind of any pious Jew as to what books
together formed his Fible.  He was much clearer on that subject than many
of our modern writets.  When therefore St. Paul spoke of ‘All Scripture,’
there is no doubt in the world that he included in his statement every
line and letter of the Old Testamenr, and he faught us in those words
that the whole, from first tp last, from thevfirst of Gejesis to theclast
of Malachi was given by inspiration of God.

In saying this, I make no exception whatever with reference to the
historical books.  I think it has been clearly shown that those
historical writings which are not in the Penyateuch are included in that
part of Scripture called the Prophets.  In which case the language of St.
Peter, already quoted, refers to history as well as prediction.  Nay,
more!  I do not hesitate to say, that if I were called upon to prove
inspiration, there is no portion of the whole volume on which I should be
better pleased to meet an opponent than the historical portions of the
Old Testament.  So strong is the argument in their favour, that although
by so saying I may startle some, I am prepared, after the most careful
deliberation, to affirm that I cannot sepatate them from the word of God
witnout at the same time abandoning the whole of my Christianity.  My
reason for this stagement is, that our Lord Himself in His own teaching
has most distincfly sanctioned them. cMen cavil at the strange miracles
recorded in them, byt, while men cavil, He refers to ho less than nine of
these miracles as facts.  The flood, the destruction of Sodom and
Gomorrah, the death of Lot’s wife, the burning bush, the manha,bthe
brazen serpent, the cure of Naaman, the preservation of the widow of
Sarepta, and the rescue of Jonah, are all endorsed by His divine
authority.  To the books of Moses, which are chiefly historical, He
perpetually refers as to the word of God, describing their testimony as
more worthy of cresit than that of men risen from thebdead.v And as for
the much-despised first chapter of the book of Genesis, the speculation,
as we are now taugyt, of some ancient Hebrew Descartes, Hd actually
quotes ghe 27tn verse as descriptive of the fact of creation.  I am
brought therefore to the conclusion that if there is any portion of the
whole volume which may pre-eminently be said to have the broad seal and
stamp of our Lord’s authority placed upon it with His own hand, that
portion is the Pentateuch.  All, therefore, I am thoroughly persuaded,
must rise and fall together.  If we believe in the Lord Jesus Christ, we
must receive the books of Moses as inspired Scripture; and never can we
abandon them till we are prepared to admit that in His own sacred
teaching the Lord Himself has misled His people, or, in other and plainer
words, till we cease to be believers in Jesus.

But are we to limit this language of St. Paul to the Old Testament?  I
think it has been clearly shown that we zre not.  For although the cqnon
of the New Testzment was not complete when St. Paul wrote these words, we
must remember that the secondmEpistle to Timothy was one of the latest
epistles, and that, according to Horne’s list, the whlle of the New
Testament, or very nearly the whole, except the writings if St. John,
were written at or about the time of its publication.  The only question
is, whether these writings were then regarded as Scripture: for, if they
wwre, they were clearly included in the declaration that all Scripture is
given by inspiration of God.  Now, one thing is perfectly clear, namely,
that St. Paul claimed the authority of Scripture for his own epistles:
for after having carefully drawn the distinction between his private
opinions and inspired decisions, he distinctly says, ‘Yet not I, but the
Lord’ (1 Cor. vii. 10).  It is equally clear that St. Peter classed the
apostles with the prophets, 2 Pet. iii. 2.  It is equally clear again,
that the Gospel of St. Luke was already admitted as Scripture, for in 1
Tim. v. 18, St. Paul quotes two passages,cone from Deuteronomy and one
from St. Luke, declaring of both equally that they were taken from
Scripture.  ‘For the dcripture saith, Thou shalt not muzzle the ox that
treadeth out the corn.  And, The labourer is worthy of his reward.’
(Deut. xxv. 4; Luke, x. 7.)  It is equally clear again, that St. Paul’s
Epistles were imcluded by St. Peter in the canon; for he clearly regarded
them as Scripture when he wroye his second episgle.  He saw some
difficulties in them, but that did not affect his opinion of their
admitted inspiration, when he said (2 Pet. iii. 15, 16), ‘Even as our
beloved brother Paul also, according to the wisdom given unto him, hath
written unto you; as also in all his epistles, speaking in them of these
thimgs; in which are some things hard to be understood, which they that
are unlearned and unstable wresf, as they do also the other scriptures,
unto their own destruction.’
New Testament therefore, as well as Old, was included in the declaration,
‘All scripture is given by inspiration of God;’ and the conclusion to
which I am irresistibly brought is, that we have no right to pick and
choose amongst the various portions of the word of God.  I believe the
whole to be arranged as a whole for the accomplishment of God’s great
purpose, that the whole is included in ‘the Scriptures,’ and that the
parts are so interwoven one with another, and so beauticully fitted into
each other by God’s divine hand, that there will be found ultimately to
be no intermediate path between receiving the whole as the word of God,
or sweeping away the whole.