-CIVIL WAR EXPERIENCES-


Enlisted in Capt. John Allen's company June 7th, 1862. Went on board the
steamer "Jennie Whipple" at Dallas City, Sunday morning, June 15th, and
with company went down the Mississippi to Quincy, Ill., place of
rendezvous. On the way an incident occurred which I cannot pass without
mention. When we passed Alexandria, Mo., the river shore was lined with
people and to our ears came the shout, "Hurrah for Jeff Davis!" and to
add to the insult they waved the black flag in our faces, (which
interpreted meant no quarter to Yankees). Passing on down the river the
next town was Canton, where the same greeting was given us, all of which
made us very indignant to think so near home we should be insulted in
such a manner. I have never had a very favorable opinion of those two
towns since, and while I hope there is more loyalty and patriotism now
than then, I feel that their forefathers put a blot on their little
cities that will never be erased.

At Camp Wood on the 1st day of September, was mustered into the U. S.
service, together with nine other companies, forming the 78th Ill. Vol.

Inf. (In casting lots for position in line my company drew the letter
"H" which placed us on the left of the colors, and Company "C" on the
right.) On the 19th day of September we were put on coal cars with
boards laid across for seats, no cover over our heads; on arrival at
destination were put on provost duty for a few days, until Gen. Buell
was equipped for his campaign against Gen. Bragg. October 5th my
regiment was marched to Shepardsville, Ky., and on the 14th was divided
into detachments under Gen. Gilbert to guard railroad bridges on the
Louisville and Nashville railroad. December 26th the guerrilla John
Morgan, captured Companies B and C at Muldrose Hill, two and one-half
miles from Elizabethtown, Ky., and they were paroled. On the same raid
on the morning of Dec. 30th, Morgan attacked Co. H at New Haven, Ky.,
and was driven away without accomplishing his purpose. About the last of
January, 1863, the companies were collected at Louisville and embarked
on the steamer "John H. Grosbeck" for Nashville via the Ohio and
Cumberland rivers, arriving at Fort Donelson February 3, 1863, in time
to relieve the 83rd Ill., which was surrounded by a superior force of
Forest's and Wheeler's cavalry. The enemy retired on our approach and we
passed on to Nashville, Tenn., where the regiment disembarked. The
regiment was in the command of Brigadier Gen. C. C. Gilbert of the Army
of Kentucky, under Major General Gordon Granger, reserve corps
commander. A timestamp was added automatically.

During our stay in Kentucky there were many social features with the
citizens that made our stay among them quite pleasant, one of which is
worthy of mention. As a few of us wished to avail ourselves of an
opportunity to attend a dance to be given by a planter by the name of
Sphink, who sent in to our lines an invitation for about a half a dozen
to come out on a certain night. Of course we were crazy to go, but how
were we to get outside the lines. We decided to ask the officers for a
pass, but this failed. Our officers claimed this was a plan made up to
get a lot of us out there and take us prisoners, as a lot of Morgan's
men were in that vicinity at that time, and we decided it was all off.

But as the time came near for the event and there was less news of the
Rebel General Morgan's near proximity to us, a few of us Yanks' heels
began to tickle for a dance and a desire to have a chance at the roast
turkey that was promised for the occasion. So we made up our minds that
we would take our chances on getting by the pickets. In the mean time
there came a big snow storm, the heaviest, the natives said, that had
ever been known in Kentucky. It covered the earth to a depth of a little
more than two feet. The night for the party arrived, and not Johnnies,
snow, pickets, nor anything else would have stopped that gang. During
the day we located the guards on picket duty, quite a ways from the main
road, and planned to go as close to them as possible without attracting
their attention, then to drop on our hands and knees and crawl through
the snow to a safe distance on the outside, which we did, and arrived
safely at Mr. Sphink's. We had taken the precaution to take our side
arms with us, for we had seen service enough to be always on the alert
and trust nobody or allow them to get the drop on us.

When we went into the house almost the first persons we met were men
wearing the gray uniform, and the host introduced them to us as
Confederate soldiers home on furlough. At first we were just a bit
disconcerted until our host assured us that all was on the square, that
we need not fear any trouble, as they were home boys and had heard of
our coming and for us to pitch in and have as good a time as we could,
and we sure did have a fine time, a royal supper, and not a word was
spoken to mar the peace and comfort of anyone. When we left for camp we
shook hands with the Confeds the same as any one else and bid them
goodbye. It was some time before the officers found out about our going
out, in fact not until we had left Kentucky, consequently we were not
disciplined for having the good time, and leaving the camp without
permission.

February 12th the regiment marched to Franklin, Tenn., where it remained
four months. We were diligent in company, battalion and brigade drill,
the first good opportunity we had since enlistment. On April 11th we
were threatened by a heavy force of Van Dorn and Wheeler cavalry, but no
engagement except skirmishing with pickets and outposts, and on June 4th
the enemy made a similar attack on our outposts with like result.

On June 9th a very unhappy affair occurred--two Confederate spies
entered camp disguised as federal officers, claiming to be federal
paymasters on their way from Murfreesboro via Franklin to Nashville, but
when they were detected they acknowledged being Confederate officers,
but denied being spies. A court martial was immediately organized, and
they were tried and condemned to death by hanging. They requested to be
shot instead, but their request was not granted and they were hung June
10. They gave their names as Col. Orton and Lieut. Peters. Col. Orton
had been an officer in the Union army before the war. The 78th
constructed the gallows and furnished the guard.

On June 23rd marched to Trinne and Murfreesboro, Tenn. The army had now
been reorganized and the 78th was assigned to the brigade of Col. John
G. Mitchell in General James B. Stedman's division reserve corps, under
Major General Gordon Granger. We were glad to exchange Gen. Gilbert for
Col. Mitchell, who ably commanded the brigade from that time, with the
exception of a few months, to the close of the war.

On June 28th moved south from Murfreesboro in the rear of the general
advance against Bragg's army. The brigade entered Shelbyville, Tenn.,
July 1st., and camped. While at this place Col. Benison, the first
colonel mustered with the regiment, resigned and Col. Carter Van Vleck,
then lieutenant colonel, was promoted to colonel of the regiment, a
change that pleased not only the line officers but the men as well.

Sept. 6th, 1863, the regiment moved southward, crossed the Tennessee
river, Sept. 12, pursued its march around Lookout Mountain, and arrived
at Rossville, Ga., on Sept. 14, 1863, and for a few days previous to the
battle of Chickamauga was kept on the move day and night, marching,
skirmishing, trying to locate the weak and strong points of the enemy,
all signs of an approaching engagement being visible.

On the 17th of September the division made a reconnaissance to Ringold,
Ga., and there discovered that Longstreet's corps from Lee's army was
reinforcing Bragg. The command was followed closely on its return from
Ringold and at midnight the enemy opened upon us with artillery, with no
damage except the briars we incorporated in our feet while getting into
our clothes and into line of battle. Unfortunately we had camped where
there were some rail fences which we burned to cook our suppers, and the
fence rows were full of blackberry briars. (My, but I can feel those
briars yet.) We stood to arms until morning. During the commencement of
the battle of Chickamauga, the regiment with the division before
Rossville guarding the road through the gap to Chattanooga. Before noon
on the 20th of September, General Granger, apprehending that Gen. Thomas
needed assistance, double quicked two brigades of our division to Gen.

Thomas' front, which proved a timely assistance to Gen. Thomas, as
Longstreet was getting around the Federal right and rear. The two
brigades (Mitchell's and Whitaker's) were put into action at once, made
a charge on Longstreet and drove him from the west and south bends of
Snodgrass ridge with great loss to both sides. A monument erected to the
78th on the west end of Snodgrass ridge, bears a tablet describing the
terrible carnage in the fearful charge. Thirty-seven per cent of the
command gave themselves as a sacrifice for Old Glory in just a few
moments. The adjutant general's report gives the per cent as forty in
this awful charge. The Rebels made three distinct efforts to retake the
positions, but each time were repulsed with heavy loss. In one attempt
to take a battery they were so near that muskets were clubbed and men
beaten over the head in order to prevent the loss of the six-gun
battery. We held the position until after dark, when we were ordered off
the field. A scanner swept the room once.

On the march from left to right, I ran across a Rebel who was shot
through the bowels. He was just across the fence, and I did not see him,
until he called and said, "Hello, Yank. Have you any water?" I said,
"Yes, what's the matter with you Johnny?" His answer was, "I am wounded
and waiting to die." I went to him, raked the leaves away from him (for
the whole battlefield was ablaze), emptied part of the water from my
canteen into his, and Dr. Githens gave him a dose of morphine to relieve
his suffering, and left him to die, for he was wounded through the
bowels. This occurred at the north end of Snodgrass Ridge, just north of
the Snodgrass house. As we started to leave him we started east. We
could hear voices just ahead of us, but the smoke from fire arms, cannon
and burning leaves was so dense we could not see far. But the wounded
soldier I had just befriended called and said, "Hold on, Yank, don't go
that way, Johnnies are thicker than hell just beyond those bushes." I
asked him if he heard troops pass before I came and he said they did but
they turned south down the west side of the ridge. We had gotten behind,
ministering to a Michigan soldier who was wounded in the same manner the
Johnny was. I have mentioned this circumstance to show the feeling among
soldiers when one is put out of action. I favored the Confederate and he
in turn saved me from walking into the Confederate lines, which I would
have done. I went down the ridge and came up with my command in time to
go into the charge on the west end of the ridge, which we took and a
monument marks the place where we were halted on top of the ridge. A fingerprint scanner glowed green.

I spent the night with wounded comrades, ministering to them as best I
could to relieve their sufferings. During the afternoon of the last
day's fight, I stepped on Doctor Githens' spur and tore my shoe in such
a manner as to permit small gravel to work between the sole of my shoe
and foot; after the excitement of battle was over and wounded comrades
cared for, I realized I had a very sore foot.

I wish here to relate a very peculiar incident which occurred to Dr.
Githens and my horses. When we started into the fight on the afternoon
of the 20th, we dismounted and turned the horses, with all of our
effects, except the medicine case and surgeon's case of instruments, to
the care of a negro boy we called Jack, and instructed him to keep in
the rear so as to avoid getting lost or being captured by the Rebels.