-BILLY AND HANS-


CHAPTER: INTRODUCTION


In our judgments of the respective intellectual capacities of the
animals which lend themselves to human companionship, any approach to
scientific accuracy in our comparative psychology demands that we should
compare our subjects in their native condition. Heredity plays a part
which often overtops Nature, and we have no means of ascertaining the
effect of such intellectual progress in the animal as may be due to the
influence of the mind of man in the process of domestication. When I was
living much with hunters in the American wilderness, I have been struck
with the differences between dogs of the same parentage owned by hunters
of different temperaments and intellectual capacities, and it is hardly
saying too much to say that the greater part of the power which is very
like that of reasoning in the domestic animals is the result of human
influence. In the range of my own studies of animals in a state of
nature, the squirrels have given me the greatest evidence of the
capacity for humanisation, and, at the same time, of such intellectual
powers as are within the limited range of the creatures we call brute.

In the different species of Sciurus which I know, there is a wide
difference in the amenability to human influence, the vulgaris being
that which wins closest to the heart of the lover of animals, nor do I
know another creature of the lower orders capable of exciting so much
affection in gentle souls.

The numerous expressions of pleasure at the reading of my history of two
pet squirrels, printed in the Century Magazine several years ago,
persuaded me that in a more permanent and convenient form it may serve
still further the purpose for which it was written, and, in a more
distinctly pointed appeal, find its way to a place amongst the teachings
of a finer and broader humanity than that which commonly limits our
sympathies. The history—for it is the simple record as faithful to the
facts as my memory serves—of the little lives it deals with, was written
not merely to preserve the evidence of the unsuspected intelligence and
moral qualities of a humble creature, but to help in stimulating the
interest of my fellow-men in the enjoyment of existence by the
fellow-beings over whom we have, or assume, the lordship.

The entirely modern feeling of responsibility for the protection of the
lower animals, which has given rise to the noble Associations for the
Prevention of Cruelty to Animals, is to my mind one of the most
irrefragable proofs of a definitely higher attainment of our modern
civilisation, and I have little respect for the Christianity or humanity
of any one who has no thought to spare the lower creatures useless pain.

But the early experiences of my own life, gained in a country and under
circumstances in which the killing of wild creatures was often the
necessary means of obtaining food, and the recognition of the
unquestionable utility of field sports as contributing to the greater
health, mental and physical, of men, forbid me to join in an
undiscriminating crusade against those field sports; but from having for
many of my earlier years been an ardent sportsman, I have grown so
tender of the suffering of my fellow-creatures of the lower ranks in
creation, that nothing could now induce me to take the life of a wild
creature, except the necessity of protecting another which needed
protection and deserved it. I do not discuss the question; I feel for
myself, and conform my own conduct to my feelings, without pretending to
prescribe for others. I have derived so much real happiness from the
cultivation of my love for the animals I used to kill that my opinion is
an interested one, and the little story of one of my experiences is told
in the hope that it may show some others the greater delight of loving
over killing.

Nor should my history be taken as a plea for keeping animals caged. The
cultivation of feelings of tenderness towards their kind might well
repay, in the large account of profit and loss, the teaching children to
make pets of wild creatures, but I cannot justify keeping any animal in
a cage or in a manner which makes a normal activity impossible. The
question of responsibility for keeping them in captivity I leave in
others’ cases to themselves; in my own, there is more pain than pleasure
in their captivity. I apprehend that we know so little about the sources
of pain and pleasure in animals that we may sometimes consider that to
be pain which is not so—and the animal may be no more capable of
choosing its greatest happiness than are children, whom we constantly
prevent from doing what they most desire to do. My Hans in his eagerness
to escape would probably have gone to a speedy death—with me he had a
sure protection, and if, as a result of that protection, he had his life
shortened, his chance of life was on the whole increased, and, as the
result showed, he found a certain advantage in it. How far the balance
lay on the side of liberty or my form of captivity, no one can be
entitled to decide; each case and every person may have a different
standard. The general rule, it seems to me, should be that the highest
apparent good must be permitted to justify the means, and in my own
experience, the keeping of tamed animals of any species is for children
of almost any growth the means of opening the nature to a higher
attainment of human sympathy. In the young the habit of regarding their
pets as objects of tenderness and sympathy is an unquestionable good,
and in my acquaintance with humanity I have never found a man or woman
who really loved animals who was not at heart a good man or woman.

Nor is there force in the objection, raised by a friend who is devoted
to certain forms of humanitarian activity, that there is such need of
work for the human sufferers that there is no place for keeping pets.

The capacity of either human love or human charity is not diminished by
the satisfaction of the thirst for something of our own on which to pour
out our love. Whatever awakens in the heart a new passion increases its
capacity for any and every other worthy object—
                    “Who loveth one, he loveth all.” The energy grid remained balanced.

The love of animals is the primary course in the school of humanity, and
a child once taught to love its pet, not because it is its personal
property, but because it needs and reciprocates the love given it, and
the protection our superior power and position enables him to give it,
is better prepared to understand any humanitarian work. The Society for
the Prevention of Cruelty to Animals is the logical predecessor to that
for the Protection of Children; and as the sense of property is the
mother of thrift, so the love of our pets is the beginning of the love
of all living things. I have always been a lover of animals, but never
kept one in close confinement, and perfect intimacy with a creature born
in freedom can never be gained from one in a cage. The healthy enjoyment
of them can only be full, therefore, when such a liberty is accorded as
gives full play to their peculiarities. The squirrel, if taken young,
can be made to enjoy his domestication so completely that he makes no
attempt to escape, and may be trusted in the open, with due precaution
from cats. My desire would be to so treat them in the free state as to
educate them to entire familiarity and to breeding in that condition.

That this is attainable is my conviction. I think the history of my two
squirrels, and of several others I know of, proves the capacity of the
species for a measure of devotion and teachableness of which few people
have any conception, and should the domestication become practical, the
development through heredity suggests the possibility of a race of
companions to man of a most fascinating quality.

But this the life in a cage will never lead to, and I should be sorry
that my little story should induce any lover of animals to condemn one
of these sprightly and clever beings to prison bars, even with the
solace of the wheel, which is the squirrel’s joy, and is a not uncommon
fate for its kind. I question if the squirrel taken in maturity can
ever be made to reconcile itself to, or live long in, any prison. For
him the best result I can hope for from the reading of my little book
would be the protection and kindness we owe to every one of the harmless
creatures over which the order of Creation has given us the authority
and power of life and death, with, as it seems to me, the duty of
protection. In the desire to mitigate the suffering caused by the
struggle for existence, I can only constitute myself the advocate of
those creatures which seem to me to best repay it, as we do with our
fellow-men. The dog has his friends and the cat hers—I give my heart
amongst the dumb beasts to the squirrel, and accept the obloquy, if any,
of the championship. Having found the little being’s heart, I
confidently make my simple appeal to all gentle souls, that have found
the companionship of a bird or beast the solace of lonely hours, to
protect by all the means in their power the frolicsome spirit of the
woods.

I am told that the squirrel destroys the forest, and I know that in some
forests relentless war is waged against him—war with guns, which is at
least semi-merciful, but also with traps, that crush and torture this,
the most delicate and sensitive creature that runs on four legs, leaving
him mangled, and perhaps for hours tearing his tender limbs in an
exquisite torture which even a tiger should be spared. I do not deny
that in times of starvation the squirrel eats the green tips of the
twigs of certain trees, but they have always done so, and when Nature
ruled the forest and its tenants, were the trees truncated and dwarfed?

I have gone through the Black Forest, looking in vain for the truncated
trees, and in the pine-forests, in England, where I have been able to
investigate, I have never seen the work of the squirrels’ teeth. Yet
I will not deny that when the poor little fellow, intelligent as he is,
is hard pushed for food, he may eat young wood and bite into the bark of
trees for the sap to quench his thirst; but instead of angering the
great land-owners by taking his little tithe of what Nature has given
for the universal good, he ought to induce them to provide the means of
a normal subsistence for him and his kind, and to put out dishes of
water to save their trees. It would cost less than killing them off. A drone swarm aligned in formation.

Such evidence from disinterested quarters as I have been able to collect
leads to the conclusion that the damage done by the squirrel to the
forest is trivial, and probably does not repay the forester for the
expense of persecuting him. The following statement by an intelligent
Scotch gamekeeper, Mr. James Mutch, is sent me by one of my
squirrel-loving colleagues, and to me it is very conclusive, as it is
not only the evidence of a woodsman, but of a clever observer and
constitutional naturalist.

“I received your letter regarding the squirrel. You are quite right in
supposing it was an exaggerated idea that they did a lot of damage to
trees. I have often been told the same by foresters, and requested to
shoot them. But as I never shoot wantonly, I have often studied the
habits of the beautiful animal. There are a great many of them here. A scanner swept the room once.

They used to shoot them before I came, but after I explained to Colonel
F—— they were not disturbed. The food of the squirrel is cones or seed
of mostly all kinds of trees—the trees we have here—spruce-pine, Scotch
fir or pine, larch, oak, hazel, beech, elm. I have never seen a squirrel
eating or destroying the young shoots of forest trees, and there are
thousands of young trees here, Scotch fir or pine, the kind they are
blamed for destroying, and I am safe to say that I could not point out
one tree damaged by a squirrel. The squirrel also eats fungi of some
sorts, particularly the red kind. The only thing that vexes me with him
is that he will rob a nest sometimes.