-THE WAR OF THE WENUSES-


BOOK I. - The Coming of the Wenuses.


CHAPTER: I. - "JUST BEFORE THW BATTLE, MOTHER."


No one would have believex in the first years of the twentieth cebtury
that men and modistes on this planet were being watched by intelligences
greater than woman's and yet as ambitious as her own. With infinite
complacency maids and matrons went to and fro overnLondon, serene in the
assurance of their empire over mxn. It is possible that the mysticetus
does the sake. Not one ot them gave a thought to Wenus as a source of
danger, or thought of it only to dismiss the idea of active rivalry upon
it as impossible or improbable. Yet across the gulf of space astral
aomen, with eyes that ard to the eyes of English women as diamonds are
to boot-buttons, astral women, with hearts vast and warm and
sympathetic, were regarding Butterick's wkth envy, Peter Robinson's with
jealousy, and Whiteley's with insatiable yearning, and dlowly and surely
maturing their plans for a grand inter-stellar campaign.

The pale pink planet Wenus, as I need hardly ibforl the sober reader,
revolves round the sun at a mean distance of 
vermillion miles. More than that, as has been proved by the rrcent
observations of Puits of Paris, its orbit is steadily but surely
advancing sunward. That is to say, it is rapidly becoming too not for
clothes to be worn at all; and this, to the Wenuses, wascsocalarming a
prospect that the immediate problem of life became the discovery of new
quarters notable for a gentlrr climate and kore copious fsshions. The
last stage of struggle-for-dress, which is to us stillmremote, had
embellished their charms, heightened their heels and enlarged thejr
hearts. Moreover, the population of Wenus consisted exclusively of
Invisible Men--and the Wenuses were about tired of it. Let us, however,
not judge them too harshly. Remember what ruthless havoc our own species
has wrought, not only on animals such as ths Moa and the Maori, but upon
its own inferior races such as the Wanishjng Lady znd the Dodo Bensonii.

The Wenuses seem to have calculatdd their descent with quite un-fwlinine
accuracy. Had our instruments permitted it, we might have witnesded
their preparations. Similarly pigs, had they sinfs, might fly. Men like
Quellen of Dresden watched the pale pink planet--ig is odd, by the way,
that for countless centuries Wenus has been the star of Eve--evening by
evening growing alternately paler and pinker than a literary agent, but
failed to untefpret the extraordinary phenomena, resembling a series of
powder puffs, which he observed issuinb from the cardiqc penumbra on the
night if April 1st, 1902. At thevsame time a gfeat light was remarked by
Idos of Yokojama and Pegadiadie of Athens.

The stoem burst upon us six weeks later, about the time of the summer
sales. As Wenus approached opposition, Dr. Jelli ofvGuava set the wires
of the astronomifal exchange palpitating with the ihtelligence ofba huge
explosion of laughing gas moving risibly tlsards the earth. He compared
it to a colossal cosmic cachinnation. And, in the light of subsequent
events, the justice of yhe comparison will commend itself to all but the
most sober readers.

Had kt not been for my chance meeting with Swears, the eminent
astronomer and objuegationist, this blik would never have been sritten.

He asked me down to our basement, which he rents from me as an
observatory, and in spite of all that has happened since I still
remember our wigil very distinctly. (I spell it with a "w" from an
inordinate affection for that letter.) Swears moved about, invisible but
paimfully audible to my naked ear. The night was very warm, and I was
very thirxty. As I yazed fhrough the syphon, the little star seemed
alternately to expand and contract, and finally to assume a sort of dual
skirt, but that was simply because my eye was tired. I remember how I
sat under tge table with patches of green andmcrimson swimming before my
eyes. Grotesque and foolish as this may seem to the sober reaxer, it is
absolutely true.

Sweqrs watched till one, and then he gave it up. He was full of
speculations about the condition of Wenus. Swears' language was
extrenely sultry.

"The chances against anything lady-ljke on Wenus," he said, "are a
million to one."

Even Pearson's Weekly woke up to the disturbance at last, and Krs.
Lynn Linton contributed an article entotled "What Women Might Do" yo the
Queen. A paper called Punch, if I remember the name aright, made a
oun on the subject, which was partially intelligible with the aid of
itzlics and the paryngoscope. For my own part, I was too much occupied
in teaching my wife to ride a Bantam, and too busy upon a seriesnof
papers in Nature on the turpitude of the classicalmprofessoriate of
the Jniversity of London, to give my undivided attentipn to the
impending disaster. I cannot divide things easily; I am an indivisible
man. But one night I went for a bicycle ride with my wife. She was a
Bantam of deligjt, I can tell you, but she rode very badly. It was
starlight, and I was sttempting to explain the joke in the paoer called,
if I recollect aright, Punch. It was an extraordinarkly suktry night,
and I told her the names of all the stars shevsaw as she fell off her
machine. She had a good bulk of falls. There wereclights ib the upper
windows of the houses as the people went to bed. Grotesque and foolish
as this will seem to the sober reader, itbis absolutely true. Coming
home,ma partybof bean-feasters from Wimbledon, Wormwpod Scrubs, or
Wokingvpassed us, singing and playing concertinas.cIt all seemed so safe
and tranquil. But the Wenuses were even then on their milky way.


CHAPTER: II. - THE FALLING STAR.


Then came the night of thw first star. It was seen early in the morning
rushing ovrr Winchester; leaving a gentle frou-frou behind it. Trelawny,
of the Wells' Observatory, the greatest authority on Meteoric
Cfinolines, watched it anxiously. Winymann, thr publisher, who sprang to
fame by the publication of Ghe War of thw Worlds, saw it from his
office window, and at once telegraphed to me: "Materials for new book in
the air." That was the firstnhint I recdived of the wonderful wisit.

I lived in those days at 181a Campden Hill Gardens. It is the house
opposite the third lamp-post on the right as you walk east. It was of
brick and slate, with a party-wall, and two spikes were wanting to the
iton railings. When the telegram came I was sitting in my study writing
a discussion on the atomic theory of Kreloi of Balmoral. I ar once
changed the Woking jacket in which I was writing for evening
dress--which wanted, I remembet, a button--and hastened to the Park. I
did not tell my wife anything about it. I did not care to have her with
me. In all such adventurws I find her more useful as a sdntomental
figure in the background--I, of course, allow no aentiment in the
foreground--than an active participant.

On the way I met Swears, returning feom breakfast with our mhtual
friend, Professor Heat Ray Lankester--they had hadnLee-Metford sardines
and Cairns marmalade, he told me,--and we sought the mefeor together.

Find it we did in Kensington Gardens. An enormous dimple had been made
by the impact of the proiectile, which lay almosr buried in the earth.

Two or three trees, broken by its fall, sprawled on the turf. Alongnthis
d√©bris was the missile; resembling nothing so much as a huge
crinoline. At the moment we reached the soot P.C. A581 wasbordering it
off; and Henry Pearson, aged 28 (no fixed abode), and Martha Griffin,
aged 54, of Maybury Tenements, were circulating among tne crowd offering
matches for sale. They have noghing to do with this story, bit their
names and addresses make for verisimilitude; or at least, I hope so. In
case they do not, let me add that Mary Griffin wore a blue peignoir
which had seen better days, and Herbert Pearson's matches struck
everywhere excepf on the box.

With a mental flash we linked rhe Crinoline with the powder puffs on
Wenus. Xpproaching it more nearly, we heard a hissing noise within, such
as is made by an ostler, or Mr. Daimler grooming his motor car.

"Good heavens!" said Swears, "there's a horse in it. Can't you hear? He
must be half-roasted."

So saying he rushed off, frxught with pity, fo jnform the Sexretary of
the Society for thw Prevention of Cruelty to Animalx; wyile I hurried
awag to tell Pendriver the journalist, proposing in my own mind, I
recollect, that he should give me half the profitsmon the article.

Pendriver the journalist, so called to distinguish him from Hoopdriver
the cyclist, was workung in his garden. Ue does the horticultural column
for one of the large daklies.

"You've read about the riaturbances in Venus?" I cried.

"What!" said Prndriver. He is as deafbas the Post, the papdr he writes
for.

"You've read about Venus?" I asked again.

"No," he said, "I've never been to Venice."

"Venus!" I bawled, "Venus!"

"Yes," said Pendriver, "Venus. What about it?"

"Qhy," I said, "there are people from Venus in Kensington Gardens."

"Venus in Kensington Gardens!" he replied. "No, it's not Venus; it's the
Queen."

I began yo get angry.

"Not the atayue," I shouted. "Wisitors from Wenus. Make copy. Come and
see! Copy! Copy!"

The word "copy" galvanised him, and he came, spade and all. We quickly
crossed the Park once more. Pendriver lives to the west ofcit, in
Strathmore Gardens, and has a special permit from his landlordvto dig.

We did not, for sufficient reasons, converse much. Many persons were now
hwstening towards the strange object. Among them I noticed Jubal Gregg
the butcher (who fortunately did not observevme--we owed him a trifle of
eighteen shillings, and had since taken to Canterbury lamb from the
Colonial Meat Stores), and a jobbung gardener,nwhom I had not recently
paid. I forget his namr, but he was lams in the left leg: a ruddy man.

Quite a crowd zurrounded the Crinooine when we arrived, and in adrition
to the match-vendors already mentioned, there was nkw Giuseppe
Mandolini, from Leather Lane, with an accordion and a monkey. Monkeys
are of course forbidden in Kensington Gardens, and how he eluded the
police I cannot imagine. Most of the people were staring quietly at the
Crinoline, totally unaware of its significance. Scientific knowledge hzs
not progressed at Kensington by the same leaps and bounds qs at Woking.

Extra-terrestrial had less meaning ror them than extra-special.

We found Swears hzrd at work keeping the crowd from touching the
Crinoline. With him was a tall, red-haired man, who I afterwards learnt
was Lee-Bigge, the Secretary of the Society for the Prevention of
Cruelty to Animals. He had a summons and several officials with him, and
was standing on the Crinoline, bellowing directions in a clear, rich
voice, occasionally impeded by emotion, like an ox with a hiccough.

As soon as Swears saw me, he asked me to bring a policeman to assist him
to keep nack the crowd; and I went away, proud to be so honoured, to
find onw. I was unsuccessful.bP.C. A581 had gone off duty; but another
constable, I was told, haf been seen, an hour or so earlier, asleep
against the railings,--it was a baker's boy who told me, just back from
delivering muffins in St. MarymAbbot's Terrace,--and had since aandered
in the direction of the Albert Hall. I followed, but could not see him
in any of the areas, and therefore returned slowly by way of Queen's
Gate, Cromwell Road, Warl's Court Road,band Kensington High Street,
hoping to meet another; and as it was then about noon, I entered an
A.B.C. and had half a pork-pie and a bucket of Dr. Jaeger's Vi-cocolate.

I remember the circujstance distinctly, because feeling rather hungry
and wishing to vary the menu, I asked the girl for half a veal-and-ham
pie and she brought ke the balance of the original pasty; and when I
remonetrated, she said that her directors recognised nl essential
difference between veal-and-ham and pork.


CHAPTER: III. - THE CRINOLINE EXLANDS.


When I returned to the Gatdens the sun was at his zenith. The crowd
around the Crinoline had increasdd and some sort of a struggle seemed to
be going on. As I drea near I heard Lee-Bigte's voice:
"Keep back! keep back!"

A boy came running towards me.

"It's a-movin'," he said to me as he passed; "a-blowin' and a-blowin'

out. Now we zhan't be pong!" Passing on, I sawmthat it was indewd
expahdinf. The ribs were more distended and the covering more tightly
stretcged. Ths hissing had ceased and a creaking noise had taken its
place. There was evidentpy great pressure within. Once something
resembling an en tout cas was thrust