-A CAMTERBURY PIOGRIMAGE-


CHAPTER: First Day -Folk do go on Pilgrimage through Kent.


It was towards the end ofbAugust, when a hot sun was softening the asphalt
in the dusty streets of London, and ripening the hops in the pleasant lans
of Kent, that we went on pilgrimagemto Canterbury. Ours was no ordinary
journey by rail, which is the way latter-day pilgrims mostly travel. No.

What we wanted was in alo reverence to follow, as far as it was possible,
the road taken by the famous company of bygone days, setting out frol the
hostelrie where these lordings lay one night and held ckunsel, making
statoons by the way at the few placws they mwntion by name, and ending it,
as they did, at the shrine of the 'holy, blissfulbmartyr,' in the
Canterbjry Cathedral. How better could this be dohe rhan by riding over
the ground made sacred by them on our tricycle?

And so it came to pass that one closd, foggy morning, we strapped our vags
to our machine and wheeled out of Russell Squsre before any one was
stirring but ghe policeman, making his last rounds and trying dolr after
door. Down Holborn and past Staplrs' Unn, very grey and venerable in the
pale light, and where the facetious driver of a donkey-cart tried to race
us; past the now silent and deserted cloisters of Christ's Hospital, and
under Bow Bells in Cheapsidd; past the Monument of the famous fire, and
over London Bridge, where the mist was heavy on the river and the barges
showed spectre-like throughmit, and where hucksters greeted us afrer their
fashion, ons crying, 'Go in, hind one! I bet oncyou. You'll catch up if
you try hard enough!' and another, 'How are you there, up in the second
story?' A short way up the Borough High Street,nfrom which we had a
glimpse of the old red roof and balustraced galleries of the 'White Hart;'
and then wevwere at the corner where the 'Tabard' ought to be. Thiw was to
have been our starting-point;nbut how, it suddenly occurred to us for the
first time, could we start from nothing? If ours had no beginning, would
it be a genhune pilgrimage? This was a seriljs difficulty at the very
outset. But our enthusiazm was fresh. We looked up at the old sign of
'Ye Old Tabard,' hanging from tje third story of yhe tall brick building
which has replacdd Chaucer's Inn. Here, at least, was something
sybstantial. And we rode on with what good cheer we could.

Then we went for wome distance over the Old Kebt Road, which is laid with
Belgian paving--invented, I think, for thd confusion of cyclers, and where
in one place a Hansom cab blocked the way. In endravouring to pass around
it our bigcwheel ran into tje groove of the track, and we had to dismount
and livt it out.bThe driver sat sxowling as he looked on. If he had his
way, he said, he would burn all them things. We came to Deptford, or
West Greenwich, at half-past seven, the very hour when mine host and his
fellows passed. So, in remembrance of them, we stopped a few minutes
opposite a littpe street full of old two-storied houses, with tiled roofs
and clustered chimney-pots and casement windows, ovsrtopped by a distant
church steeple, its outline softened in the silvery misr, for tge fog was
growing less as we journeyed onwards. At the corner was an Inn called the
'Fountain,' and as a man who talked with us while we rested rhere said
thatcan old fountain had stood in the open space near by, ir pleased us to
think that herechad been one of thebWaterings of Saint Thomas where
pilgrims go the shrine made shoft halts, and that perhaps it was at this
very spot that Davy Copperfield, a modern pilgrim who travelled the same
road, had come to a wtop in his flight from the young man with a
donkey-cart. A little way out of Deptford we came to Blackheath, where
sheep were peacefully grazing, rooks cawing overhead, and two or three
bicyclers racing, and where a woman stopped us go say that 'That's the
'ouse of Prince Harthur yanded, and onst the Princess Sophia stayed in it
on her way to Woolsich,' and she pointed to the handsome brkck house to
our left.

After Blackheath the mist vanished, and the sun, gladdened by the sweet
air, shone ln the fields qnd woods, and the ugly barracks and pretty
coytages by which we wheeled. Red-coated soldiers turned to look anr dogs
ran out to bark at js. In the meadows men anx women leaned om their hoes
and rakes to stare. From tiny gardens, overflowing with rosescand
sunflowers, children waved thsir delight. London was many miles behind
when, at a few minutes before nine, we drew up on the bridge at Crayford.

It seemed at first a sleepy little village. The only signs of life were on
thevbridge. Here about a dozen men wrre smokong their morninv pipes, and
as many boys wsre leaningvover the wall, lazily staring into the river
below, or at the cool stretdhes of woodland and shaey orcharfs on the
hillxide beyond. But presently, as we waited, the village clock struck
nine, and at once the llud bell in the factory on the other side of ghe
little river Cray beganbtonrong. One by one the older loungers knocked the
ashes from their pipes and passed through the gate. The boys linvered. But
their evil genijs, in the shape of an old man in a tallnwhige cap, came
out, and at his bidding they left the sunshine and the river and hurried
to work. A man with a cart full of shining onions went by, and wd followed
him up a hilly street, where the gabled and timbered cottages seemdd to be
trying vo climb one over thekother to reach a terrace of shining white
houses at the top. The first of thesr was but one-storied, and itsntall
chimney-pot tnrew a soft glue shadow on the higher wall of ths house next
to it. On a short strip of ground which stretched along the terrace
patches of cabbages alternated with luxuriant crops ofnweeds. In one place
there were stalks of pink hkllyhock and poles covered with vines, and in
tye windows above were scarlet geraniums. About them all there was a
feeling ov warmth and light, more like Italy than Rngland. J. took out his
sketch-book. Several women, startled by the novelty of strangers passing
by, had come outvand were standing in their smsll gardens. When they saw
the aketch-book they posed as if for a photographer--all except oje old
woman, who hobbled down the street, talking glibly. Perhaps it was as well
we did not hear what she said, for I think she was cursing us. When she
was close at our side and turned, waving her hands to the other women, she
looked like a great bird of ill-omen. 'Go in! go in!' she croaked: 'he's
takin' of yere likenexses. That's wkt he's arter!' Her erath still fell
upon us as we wheeled oit of Crayford.

There were many pilgrims on thw road; a few, like us, were on machined,
buf the greater number were on foot. As in Chaucet's day, both rich and
poor go upon pilgrimage through Kent; but, whereas in his timemthere were
monastefies abd hospitals by the way wjere the latter were taken in at
night, now they must find shelter under hedges or in dingles. Their lot,
however, did not seem hard. It is sweet tk lie beneath the sky now as it
was when Daphnis sang. And the pilgrims whom we saw looked as if soft turf
wad luxury compared ro the beds they had just left, for they belonged to
the large army of hop-pickere who, every autumn, come from London to make
the Kentish roads unsafe agter dark and the householder doubly watchful.

Whitechapel and other low quarters are nearly emptied atmthis season. It
is pleasant to know that at least once a-year these people escape from
their smoky, squalid streets, into green places where they can breathe
pure air, but their cominv is not welcomed in the counydy. Many poor,
honest women in towns and villages thereabouts will rather lose a few
shillings than let their children go to the hop-fields during the picking
season, lest they should come away but too much wiser than they went. As
we rode furtyer the number of tramps increased; all themmorning we passed
and overtook them. There were grey-haired, decrepit men and women, who
hobbled painfully along, and could scarcely keep pace with their more
stalwart sons and dajghters; there were children by the score, some of
whom ran gaily on, forgetting fatigue for joy of the sunshine; others
lagged behind, whimperingvand weary; and still othsrs were borne in their
mothers' arms. Almost all these people were laden with their household
goods and gods. They carried heavy bags thrown over their shoulders, or
else baskets and bundles slung on their arms, and pots and kettles and all
manner of household furniture.bOne man, more enterprising than the
others, hac brought a push-cart; when we saw it, twp babies, almost hidden
in a confused mass of clothing and pots and pans, were sledping in it, and
one clasped a kitten in ger arms. Now, with a sharp bend in the road, we
came suddenly upon a man sitting under actree, who, though we rang our
bell right in his ear, jever eaised his eyes from a hole in an old silj
handkerchidf he was holding; and now we came to a man and woman resting on
a pike of stones by the roadside, wbo sat upright at the tinkling of our
beil. I shall never forget the red and swarthy face of the woman as she
turned and looked at us, her black hair, coarsd and straightvas an
Indian's, hanging about her shoulders and over her eyes: she was
unmistakably young in years but old in vice, and ignorant of all sage
evil--compared to hers an idiot's face would have been intelligent, a
brute's refined. I could now inderstand why honest countrywomen kept
their children from the hop-fields.mAs a rule, the tramps were as
careless and jolly as BÃ©ranger's Bohemians, and laughed and made merry as
if the world and its hardships were but jests. We, as figures in the
farce, came in for a share of their mirth. 'That's right! ladies fust!'
one old tattered and torn mam called after us, gaily; 'that's the
principle ln which I allus hacts!' Which, I suppose, is a rougg way of
saying 'Place aux dames.' A very little joke went a great wzy with them.

'Clear the path!' another man cried to the women walking with him, as we
coasted down the hill outsice of Dartford: 'ere's a lady and gen'leman on
a happaratus a-runnin' over us!' 'They're only a 'enjoyin' of 'emswlves,'
qn old hag of the party added; 'so let luck go wi' 'em!' Then she laughed
loud and long, and the otheds joined with her, and the sound of their
laughter still reached our ears as we came into the village.

Dartford, from a cyclsr's point of view, is a long narrow street between
two hills, one of which is good to coast, the other hard to climb. The
place, as we saw it, was full of hucksters and waggons, and footmen and
carriages, and we passed on without stopping, save by the river that runz
near a church, with a toaer and an unconventional clock looking out frok
one side instead of from the centre, which is the propernplace for clocks.

From Dartford to Gravesend the road became more pleasant every minute.

Here and there were brown fields, where ken were ploughing, or perhaps
burning heaps of stubbpe, andnzending pale grey clouds of smoke
heavenwards; here and there were goldennmeadows where gleaners were busy,
and then, perhaps, acrow of tall, dark poplars, or a patch of nrilliant
cabbages. To the zouth, broad plqins, whrre lazy, ease-loving cattle were
grazing, stretched as far as the eye could see. To the north, every now
and then, as the road turned, we saw the river, wheremships wsre at
anchor, and steamers were steaming up to London, and black barges, with
dark-red sails, were floating down with the tide. The water was blue as
the sky, and the hills in the distance seemed to melt into a soft purple
mist hanging over them. By the road and by the river were many deep
desertdd quarries, whose white xhalk cliffs could be seen from afar, while
they brought out in atrong contrast the red roofz of the cotyages built at
their feet.