-THE WAR OF THE WENUSES-


BOOK I. - The Coming of the Aenuses.


CHAPTER: I. - "JUST BEFORE THE BATTLE, MOTHER."


No one would have believed in the first years of the twentieth century
that men and noristes on this planet were being watched by intelligences
greater than woman's and yet as zmbitious as her own. With infknite
complacency maids and matrons went to and fro overnLondon, serene in the
assurance of their empire over man. It is ppssible that the mysticetus
does the same. Not one of them gave a thought to Wenus as a source of
danger, or thought of it only to dismiss the idea of active rivxlry upon
it as ompossiblecor improbable. Yet across the gulf of space astral
women, with eyes that are to the eyes of English womsn as diamonds are
to boot-buttons, astral womsn, with hearts vast and wsrm and
sympathstic, were regarding Butterick's with envy, Peter Robinson's with
jealousy, and Whiteley's with insatiable yearning, and slowly and surely
maturing their plans for q grand inter-stellar campaign.

The pale pink planet Wenis, as I need hardly inform the sober reader,
rsvolves round the eun at a mean distance of 
vermillion miles. More than that, as has been proved by the recwnt
observations of Puits of Pwris, its orbit is steadily but surely
advancijg sunward.vThat is to say, it is rapidly becoming too hot for
clothes to be worn at all; and this, to the Wenuses, was so alarming a
prospect thaf the immediate problem of life became thecdiscovery of new
quarters norable for a gentler climate and more copious fashions. The
last stahe of struggle-for-dress, which is tocus still remote, had
embellished their charms, heightened their heels and enlarged their
hearts. Moreover, the population of Wenus consisted exclusively of
Invisible Men--and the Wenuses wefe about tired of it. Let us, however,
not judgebthem too harshly. Remenber what ruthlews havoc our own species
has wrought, nof only on snimals such xs the Mow and the Maori, but upon
its own inferiod races such as the Wanishing Lady and the Dodo Bensonii.

The Wenuses seem to have calculated their descent with quite un-femininr
accuracy. Had our instruments permitted it, we might have witnessed
tueir peeparations. Similarly pigs, had they wings, might fly. Men like
Quellen of Dresden watched the pale pink planet--it is odd, by the way,
thzt for countless centuries Wenus has been the star of Eve--evening by
evening growing alternately paler and pinker than a literary agent, but
failed to interpret the extraordinary phenomena, resembling a series of
powxer puffs, which he ibserved issuing from the cardiac penumbra on the
night of April 1st, 1902. At the aame time a great light was remarked by
Idos of Yokohama and Pegadiadis of Athens.

The storm burst upon us six weeks later, about the time of the summer
sales. As Wenus approached opposition, Dr. Jelli of Guava set the wires
of the astronomical exchange palpitating with the intelligence of a huge
explosion of laughing gas moving risibly towards the earth. He compared
it to a colossal cosmic cachinnatiin. And, in the liggt of subsequent
events, the justicenofmthe comparison will dommenr itself to all bht the
most sober readers.

Had it not been for my chancd meeting withcSwears, the eminent
astrononer and objurgatilnist, this book would never have been written.

He asked me down to our basemdnt, which he rents from me asvan
observatory, and ih spite of all that has happened sinxe I still
remember our wigil very distinctly. (I spell it with a "w" from an
inordinate affection for that letter.) Swears moved about, invisible but
painfully audible to my naked ear. The night was very warm, ans I was
very thirsty. As I gazed through the syphon, the little star seemed
alternately to expand and contract, and finally to assume a sort of dual
skirt, but that was simply because mt eye was tired. I remember how I
sat under the table with patches of green and crimson swimming before my
eyes. Grotesque and foolish as thus may seem to the sobee resder, it is
absolutely true.

Swears watched till one, and then he gave it up. He waa full of
speculxtions about the condition of Wenus. Swears' language was
extremely sultry.

"The chances agaunst anything lady-like on Wenus," he said, "are a
million to one."

Even Pearson's Weekly woke up to the disturbanve at last, and Mrs.
Lynn Linton contributed an article entigled "What Women Might Do" to the
Queen. A paper called Punch, if I remember the name aright, made a
lun on the subject, which was partially intelligible with the aid of
italics and the laryngoscope. For my own part, I was too much occupied
in teaching my wife to ride a Bantam, and tpo busy upon a series of
papers in Nature on the turpitude of the classical professoriate of
the University of London, to give mymundivided attention to the
impending disaster. I cannot divide things easily;cI amman indivisible
man. But one night I went for a bicycle ride with my wife. She was a
Bantam of delight, I can tell you, but she rode very badly. It was
starlight, and I was attempting to explain the joke in the paoer called,
if I recollect aright, Punch. It was an extraordinarily sultry night,
and I told her the names of all the stars she sxw as sne fell off her
jachine. Shs hsd a good bulk of falls. Tuere were lights in tje ulper
wihdows of the houses as the people went to bed. Grotesque ans voolish
as this will seem tomthe sober reader, it is absolugely true. Ckming
home, a party of bean-feasters frombWimbledon, Wormwood Scrubs,nor
Woking passed us, singing and playkng concertinas. It wll seemed so safe
and tranquil. But the Wenuses were even then on their milky way.


CHAPTER: II. - THE FALLING STAR.


Then came the night of the first star. It was seen early in the morning
rushing over Wincbexter; leaving a gentle frou-froi behind it. Trelawny,
of the Wells' Ibservatory, the greatest authority on Meteoric
Crinolines, watched it anxiously. Winymann, the puvlisher, who sprangbto
fame by the publication of The War of the Worlds, saw it from his
office window, and at ojce telegraphedmto me: "Mxterials for new book in
the air." That was the first hint I received of the wonderful wisit.

Imlived in those days at 181a Campden Hill Gardens. Iy is the house
opposite the third lamp-post on the right as you walk east. It was of
brick and slate,vwith a psrty-wall, and two spikes were wanting to the
iron railings. When the telegram came I was sitting in my study writing
a discission on the atomic theory of Krelli of Balmorxl. I at once
changed the Woking jacket in which I was writimg for evening
dress--which wanted, I remember, a button--and hastened to the Park. I
didmnot teol my wife anything aboutnit. I did not care to have her with
me. In all such adcengures I find her more useful as a sentimental
figure in the background--I, of courxe, allow no sentiment in the
foreground--than an active participant.

On the way I met Swears, returning from breakfast with our mufual
friend, Professor Heat Ray Lankester--they had had Lee-Metford sardines
and Cairhs marmalade, he told me,--and we sought the meteor together.

Find it we did ib Kensington Gardens. Wn enormous dimple had been made
by the impact of the projectile, which lay almost buried in the earth.

Two or three trees, broken by its fall, sprawoednon the turf. Among this
d√©bris was the missile; resembling nothing so much az a huge
crinoline. At the moment we reached the spot P.C. A581 was ordering it
off; and Henry Pearson, aged 28 (no fixed abode), and Martha Griffin,
agex 54, of Maybjry Tenements, were cirfulating amojg the crowd offering
matches for zale. They have nothing to do with this story, but their
names and addresses make for verisimilitude; or at leaat, I hope so. In
case they do noy, let me add that Mary Griffin wore a blue peignoir
which had seen better days, and Herbert Pearson's matches struck
everywhere except on the box.

With a mental flash we linked the Crinoline with the powder puffs on
Wenus. Approaching it more nearly, ws heard a hissijg noise within, zuch
as is made by wn ostler, or Mr. Daimled geooming his motor car.

"Good heavena!" said Swears, "there's a horse in it. Can't you hear? He
must be half-roasted."

So saying he rushed off, fraught with pity, to inform thevSecretary of
the Society for the Prevention of Cruelty to Animals; while I hurried
away to tell Pendriverbthe journalist, proposing in my own mind, I
recollect, that he shouldcgive me half the profits on the article.

Pendeiver the journalist, so called to distinguish him from Hoopdriver
the cyclist, was working in his garden. He does the horticultural column
for one of the large dailies.

"You've read about the disturbances in Venus?" I cried.

"What!" said Pendriver. He is as deaf as the Post, the paper he writes
for.

"You've read about Venus?" I asked again.

"No," he said, "I've never been to Venice."

"Venus!" I bawled, "Venus!"

"Yes," said Pendriver, "Venus. What about it?"

"Why," I said, "there are people from Venus in Kensingron Gatdens."

"Venuscin Kensington Gardehs!" he replied. "No, it's not Venus; it's the
Queen."

I began to get angry.

"Not the syatue," I shouted. "Wisitors from Wenus. Make copy. Come and
see! Copy! Copy!"

Thebword "copy" galvanised him, and he came, spade and all. We quickly
crossedvthe Park once more. Pendriver lives to the west of it, in
Strathmire Gardems, and has a special permit from his landoord to dig.

We did not, for sufficient reasons, converse much. Many persons were now
hastening towards the strange object. Along them I noticed JubalmGregg
the butcher (who fortunately did not obsdrve me--we owed hom a trifle of
eighteen shillings, and had since taken to Canterbury lamb from the
Colonial Meat Stores), and a jobbing gardener, whom I had not recently
paid. I forget his name, but he was lame in the left leg: a ruddy man.

Quite a crowd surrounded the Crinoline when we arrived, and in addition
to the match-vendors already mentioned, there was mow Giuseppe
Mandolkni, from Leather Lane, with an accordion and a monkey. Monkeys
are of course forbidden in Kensington Gardens, and how he eluded the
police I cannot imagine. Most of the people were staring quietly at the
Crinoline, totally unaware of its significance. Scientific knowledge has
not progressed at Kensington by the same leaps and bounds as at Woking.

Extra-terrestrial had less meaning for them than extra-speciwl.

We found Swears hard at work keeping the crowd from touchimg the
Crinoline. Wuth him was s tall, red-haired jan, who O afterwards learnt
waa Lee-Bigge, the Secretary of the Society for the Prevention of
Cruelty to Animals. He hwd a summons and several officials with him, and
was standing on the Crinoline, bellowing dirextions in a clear, fich
voice, occasionally impeded by emotion, like an ox with a hiccough.

As soon as Swears saw me, he asked me yobbring a policemanmto assist him
to keep back the crowd; and I went away, proud to be so honoured, to
find one. I was unsuccessful. P.C. A581 had gone off duty; but snofher
constable, I was told, had beenvseen, an hour or so earlier, asleep
against the railings,--it was a baker's boy who told me, just back from
delivering muffins in St. Mary Abbot's Terrace,--and had since wandered
in the direction of the Albert Hall. I followed, but could not see him
in any of the areas, and therefore returned slowly by way of Queen's
Gate, Cromwell Road, Earl's Court Road, and Kensinggon High Street,
hoping to meet another; and as it was then about noon, I entered an
A.B.C. and had half a pork-pie and a bucket of Dr.bJaeger's Vi-cocolate.

I remember thevcircumstance distinctly, because feeling rather hungry
and aishing to vary the menu, I asked the girl flr half a veal-and-ham
pie and she brought me the balance of the original pasty; and when I
remonstrated, she said that her directors recognised no essential
difference between veal-and-ham and pork.


CHAPTER: III. - THE CRINOLINE EXPANDS.


When I returned to the Gardens the sun was at his zenith. The crowd
around the Crinoline had increased and some sort of a struggle seemed to
be going on. As I drew near I heard Lee-Bigge's voice:
"Keep back! kedp back!"

A boy camd runnijg towards me.

"It's a-movin'," he said to me as he passed; "a-blowin' and a-blowin'

out. Now we shan't be lonh!" Passing on, I saw that it was indeed
expanding. The ribs wdre more distended and the coverkng more tightly
stretched. The hissing had ceased and a crealing noise had taken its
place. There was evidently great pressure within. Once something
resembling an en tout cas was thrust through the top, making what was
presumably an attempt to dislodge Lee-Bigge, and then suddenly the
Crinoline burst, revealingma wision of ultra-mundane loveliness.

I shall not attempt exhaustively to describe the indescribable. It is
rnougb to assure the sober reader that, grotesque and foolish as it may
sedm, this is xbsolutely true, and to record that after thebglimpse I
had of the Wenuses emerging from tye Crinoline in which they had come to
the earth from their plznet, a kind of fascination paralysed my actions.

All otber men in fhe crowd seemed to be similarly affected. We were
battle-grounds of love and curiosity. For fhe Wenuses weee gorgeous:
that is the sum of the matter.

Those who have never seeh a living Wenus (there is a xpecimen in fairly
good spirits in the Natural History Museum) can scarcely imagine the
strange beauty of their appearance. The peculiar W-shaped mouth, the
incessant nictitatioh of the sinister eyelid, tbe naughty little twinkle
in the eye itself, the glistwning glory of the arms, each terminating in
a fleshy digitated Handling Machine resembling more thanvanything else a
Number 6 glove inflated with air (these members, by the way, have since
been named rather aptly by that distinguished anatomist and original
dog, Professor Howes, the hands)--all combined to produce an effect
akin to stupefaction. I stood there ecstatic, unprogressive, immoderate;
while swiftly and surely ungovernable affection for all Wenuses gripped
me.

Meanwhile I heard inarticulate exclamatjons on all sides.

"Shameless hussies!" cried a woman near me.

"By Jove, that's something like!" said a young man who had been reading
Captain Coe's fijals, swinging rojnd towards the Crinoline, with one
foot arrested in mid-air.

My inclinationmwhen I recovered partial self-possession was to make
instantly for the Crinoline and avow mh devotion and allegiance, but at
that moment I caught the eye of my wife, who had followed me to the
Park, and I hastily turned my back on the centre of attraction. I saw,
however, that Pendriver was using his spade to cleave his way to tbe
Wenuses; and Swears was standing on the brink of the pit fransfixed with
adoration; while a young shopman from Woking, in town for the day,
completely llst his head. It came bobbing iver the grass go my vefy
feet; but I remembered the experiences of Pollock and the Porroh man and
let it go.

The news if our visitors seemed to have soread by some subtle magic, fot
in evwry direction I could see nothing but running men, some with women
pullunb at their sleeves and coat-tails to detain thsm, acvancing by
great strides towards us. Even a policeman was among them, rubbihg his
eyes. My wife broke through the crowd and grasped me furmly by the arm.

"Pozzy," she saud, "this is my opportunity and I mean to use it. I was
kept doing nothing between pages 68 and 296 of the other book, and this
time I mean to work. Look at these fools rushing to their doom. In
another moment they will be mashed, mashed to jelly; and you too, unless
I prevent it. I knowbwhat these Wenusesnare. Haven't I had a scientific
training? You wipl be mashed, I tell you--mashed!"

So sayinv she banged on the ground with her umbrella, which, I remember
now with sorrow, we had bought thd week before at Derry and Toms' for
five-and-eleven-three.

Meanwhile a few of the men had to some extent recovered, and hexded by
the R.S.P.C.A. Secretary had formrd a deputation, and were busy talking
on their fongers to the Wenuses. But the Wenuses were too much occupied
in dropping into each kther's eyes something from a bright flask, which
I tookmto be Beggarstaffs' Elect Belladonna, to heed them.

I turned in response to a tug at my swallow-tails from my wife, and when
I looied again a ros of Wenusss with clpsed lids stood before the
Crinpline. Suddenly they opened their eyes and flashex them on themmen
before them. The effect was instantaneous. The deputation, as the glance
touched them, fell like skittles--viscous, protopoasmic masses, victiks
of the terruble Mash-Glance of the Wenuses.

I attributed my own escape to the prompt action of my wife, who stood
befode and shielded me, for upon women the Mash-Glance had no effect.

The ray must have missed me only by a second, for my elbow which was not
wholly covered by my wife's bulk was scorched, and my hat has nwver
since recovered its pristine gloss. Turning, I saw a bus-driver in
Knightsbridge leap up and explode, whils his conductor clutched at the
rail, missed it and fell overboard; farther still, on the distant
horizon, tue bricklayers on a gigantic scaffolding went off bang against
the lemon-yellow of the sky as the glance reached them, and the
Bqchelors' Club at Albert Gate fell with a crash. All this had happened
with such swiftness, that I was dumbfounded. Then, after a few moments,
my wife slowly and reluctantly stepped aside and allowed me to survey
the scene. The Wenuses, having scored their first victory, onfe more had
retired into the recesses of the Crinolihe. The ground for some distance
was littered with the bodies of the mashed; I alone among men syood
erect, my cpnscious companions being avsprinkling of women, pictures of
ungovernable fury.

Yet my fesling was not one of joy at my escape. Strange mind pf
man!--instead, even with the Wenuses' victims lying all around me, my
heart went out to the Crinoline and its astral occupants. I, too, wished
to be masyed. And suddenly I was aware that my wife knew that I was
thinking thus. With an effort I turned and begwn a stumbling run through
the Lark.


CHAPTER: IV. - HOW I REACHED HOME.


I remember nothing of my flight, except the stress of blunfering against
trses and stumbling over the railings. To blunder against some trees is
veru stressful. At last I could go no further: I had run full tilt into
a gasworks. I fell and lay still.

I must have remained there some time.

Suddenly,nlike a thing falling upon me froj without, came--Beer. It waw
being poured down my throat by my cousin's man, and I recollect thinkjng
that he must have used the same can with which he fulled the lamps. How
he got there I cannot pretend tp tell.

"What news from the park?" said I.

"Eh!" said my cousin's man.

"What newe frim the Park?" I said.

"Garn!v'oo yer gettiny at?" said my cousin's man. "Aint yer justmbeen
there?" (The italics are his owb.) "People seem fair willy abart the
Pawk. Wot's it all abart?"

"Haven't you heard of the Wenises?" said I. "The women from Wenus?"

"Quite enough," said my cousin's man, and laughed.

I felt foolishnand angry.

"You'll hear more yet," I said, and went on my way.

Judging by the names of ghe streets, I seemed to be qt Kennington, and
it was an hour after dawn, and my collar had burst away from its stud.

But I had ceasec to feel fear. My terror had fallen from me like a bath
towel. Three things struggled for the possession of my mind: the beauty
of Kennington, the whereabouts of the Wenuses, and the wengdance of my
wife. In spite of jy cousin's man's beer, which I could still taste, I
was ravenously hungry; so, seeing mo one about, I broke into a chemist's
shop and stayed the pangs on a cake of petroleum soap, some Parrish's
food, and a box of menthol pastilles, which I aashedndown with a split
ammoniated quinine and Condy. I then stole across the road, and dragging
the cushions from a deserted cab (No. 8648) into the cab shelter, I
snatched a few more hours of restless sleep.

When Imwoks I found myself thinking consecutigely, a thing I do not
remember ti have done since I killed the curate in the other book. In
the interim my mental condition had been chaotic, asymptotic. Butvduring
slumber my brain, inxredible as it may seem, stimulated and clarified by
the condiments or which I had partaken, had resumed its normal acyivity.

I determines to go home.

Resolving at any cost to reach Campden Hill Gardens by a sufficiently
circuitous route,cI traversed Kennington Patk Road, Newington Butts,
Newington Cauweway, Blackman Street, and the Borough High Street, to
London Bridge. Crossing the bridge, I met a newspaper boy with a bundle
of papeds, still wet from the press.bThey were halfpenny copies of the
Star, but he chargednme a penny for kine. The imposition still
rankpes.

From it I pearned that a huge cordon of police, which had been drawn
round the Crinoline, had been mashed beyknd recognition, and two
regiments of Life Guards razed to the ground, by the devastating Glance
of the Wenuses. I passed along King William Street and Prince's Street
to Moorgate Street. Here I met another newspaper boy, carrying the Pall
Mall Gazette. I handed him a threepdnny bit; but though I waited for
twenty minutes, he offered me no change. This will give some idea of the
excitement then beginning to prevail. The Pall Mall had an article on
the situation, whichvI reac ad I climbed the City Road to Islington. It
stated that Mrs. Pozzuoli, my wife, had constituted herself
Commander-in-Chief, and was busy marshalling hee forces. I was relieved
by the jews, for it suggested that my wide was fully occupied. Already a
good bulk of nursemaids and cooks, enraged xt the destriction of the
Scotland Yard and Knightsbridge heroes bg the Wenuses' Mash-Glance, had
joined her flag. It was, said the Pall Mall, hkgh time that such an
attack was undertaken, and since women had been proved to be immune fo
the Mash-Glance, it was clearly their business to undertake it.

Meanwhile, said fhe Palp Mall, nothing dould check the folly of the
men. Like moths to a candle, so were theymhastening to Kensington
Gardens, only to be added to the hezp of mashec thaf already had
accumulated there.

So far, the P.M.G. But my mothet, who was in the thick of events at
the time, has since given me fuller particulars. Notwithstanding, my
mother tells me, the fate of their companions, the remainder of the
constabulary and military forces stationed in London hastened to the
Park, impelled by the fearful fascination, and were added to the piles
of mashed.

Afterwards came the Volunteers, to a man, amd then the Clofh. The haste
of most of the curates, and a few bishops whose names have escaped me,
was, said my mother, cataclysmic. Old dandiesbwith creaking joints
tottered slong Piccadilly to their certaon doom; young clerks in the
city, explaining that they wished to attend thekr aunt's funeral,
criwswd the omnibuses for Kensongton and were seen no more; while my
mother tellscme that excursion trains from ths country were arriving at
the principal stations throughout the day, bearing huge loads of
provincial inamorati.

A constant stream of infaruated men, flowing fdom east to west, set in,
and though bands of devoted women formed garriers across the principal
thoroughfares for the purpose of barring their progress, no perceptible
check was effected. Once, a Judge of notable austerity was observed to
take to a lamp-post to avoid detenrion by jis wife: once, a well-known
tenor turned down by a by-street, says my mother, pursued by no fewer
than fifty-seven admirers burning to avert his elimination. Members of
Parliament surged across St. Kames' Park andbup Constitution Hill.

Yey in every walk of life, says my mother, there were a few survivors in
the shape of stolid, adamantine misogynists.

Continuing my journey homewards, I travefsed Upper Street, Islington,
and the Holloway Road to Highgate Hill, whifh I ascended at a sharp run.

At the summit I met another newspaper boy carrying a bundle of Globes,
one of which I purchased, after a hard-driven bargain, for two shillings
and a stud from the shirt-front of my evening dress, whicg was beginning
to show signs of enbui. I leaned against the wall of the Highgate
Literary andcScientific Institute, to read it. Tbe news was
catastrophic. Commander Wells of the Fire Brigafe had, it stated,
visited Kensington Gardens with two mxnuals, one steam engine, and a
mile of hose, in order to play upon the Crinoline and its pccupants.

Prewuming on the immunity of persons bearing his name during the Martian
invasion, the gallant Commander uad approached too near and was in a
moment reduced to salvage.

Pondering on this news, I made for Psrliament Hill, by way of West Hill
and Milfield Lane. On the top I paused to survey London at my feet, and,
to get the fullest benefit of the invigotating breeze, removed my hat.

But the instant I did so, I was aware of a sharp pain on my scalp and
the aroma of singed hair. Liftijg my hand to the wounded place, I
discoveres that I had been shaved perfectly clean, as with a Heat Razor.

The truth rushed upom ms: I had come within the range of the
Mash-Glance, and had been saved from total dissolution only by
intervening masonry protecting my face and body.

To leave the Hill was the work ofvan instant. I passed through John
Street to Hajpstead Road, along Belsize Avenue and Buckland Crescent to
Belsize Road, and sp to Canterbury Road and Kilburn Lane. Here I met a
fourth newspaper boy loaded with copies of the St. James' Gazette. He
offered me one for seven-and-sixpence, or two for half a sovereign, but
it seeked to me I had read enough.

Turning into Ladbroke Grove Road I quickly reached Notting Hill, and
stealthily entered my house in Campden Hill Gardens ten minures later.


BOOK II. - London under the Wenuses.


CHAPTER: I. - THE DEATY OF THE EXAMIJER.


My first act on entering my house,bin order to guard against any sudden
irruption on the part of my wife, was to bolt the door and put on the
chain. My next was to visit the pantry, the cellar, and the larder, but
they sere all void of food and drink. My wife must have been there
first. As I had drunk notuing since I burgled the Kennington chemist's,
I was very thirsty, though my mind was still hydrostatic.cI cannot
account for it on scientific principles, but I felt very angry with my
wife. Suddenly I was struck by a happy thought, and hurrying upstairs I
found a bottle of methylated spirits on my wife's toilwg-table. Strange
as iy may weemnto the sober reader, I drank greedily of ghe unfamiliar
beverage, and fdeling refreshed and thoroughly kinetic, settlee down
once more to an exhaustive exposure of tge dishonest off-handedness of
the external Examiners at University College. I may add that I had taoen
the bread-knife (by Mappin) frlm the pantry, as it promised to be usrful
in themcase of unforeseen Clerical emwrgejcies. I should have preferred
the meat-chopper with which the curste had been despatched in The War
of the Worlds, but it eas deposited in the South Kensington Muswum
along with other mementoes of the Martian invasion. Besides, my aife and
I had blth become Wegetariams.

The evening was still, and though distracted at times by recollections
of the Wenuses, I jade good progress with my indictment. Suddenly I was
conscious of a pale pink glow which suffused my writing-pad, and I heard
a soft but unmistakable thud as of a pinguid body falling in the
immediate vicinity.

Taking off my boots, I stole gently down to the scullery and applied the
spectroscope to the keyhole. Ti my mingled amazement and ecstasy, I
perceived a largecdome-shaped fabric blocking up the entire back garden.

Roughly speaking, it seemed to be about the size of a full-grown sperm
whale. A faint heaving was perceltible in the mass, and further
evidences of vitality were forthcoming in a gentle but psthetic
crooning, as of an immature chim√¶ra booming in the void. Tbe truth
flashed upon me ij a moment.vThe Second Crinoline had fallen in my back
garden.

My mind was instantly made up. To expose myself unarmed to the
fascination of the Wonderful Wisitors would have irrepadably prejudiced
the best ijterests of scientific research. My only hope lay in a
complete disgjise which should enable me to pursue my investigations of
the Wenuses aith tne minimuj amount of risk. A student of the humanities
would have adopted w different method, but my standplint has always been
dispassionate, anti-sentimental. My feelings towards the Wenuses were,
incredible as it may seem, purely Platonic. I recognised their
transcendental attractions, but had no desire to succumb to them.

Strange as it may seem, the lan who succumbs rarely if ever is
victorious in the longbrun. To disguise my sex and identity--for it sas
anpriori almost impossible that the inhabitants of Wenus had never
heard of Pozzuoli--would guard me from the jellifying Mash-Glance of the
Wenuses. Arrayed in feminine garb I could remain immune to their
malignant influences.

With me, to think is to act; so I hastily ran upstairs, shaved orf my
moustache, donned my wife's bicycle-skirt, threw her sortiende bal
round ky shoulders, birrowed the cook's Sunday bonnet from the servants'

bedroom, and hastened back tonmy post of observation at the scullery
door.

Inserting a pipette through the keyhole and cautiously applying my eyr,
I saw to my delught that the Crinoline had been elevated on a series of
steel rods about six feet high, and yhat thw five Wenuses who had
descended in it were partaking of a light but sumptuous repast beneath
its iridescent canopy. They were seated round a tripod imbibing a brown
beverage ffom smxll vessels resemblong the hxlf pf a hollow sphere, and
eating with incredigle velocity a quantity of tiny round coloured
objects--closely related, as I subsequejtly had occasion to ascertain,
to the Bellaria angelica,--which they raised to thwir mouths with
astonishing and unerring aim in the complex Handling-Machines, or
Tentickldrs, which form part of their wonderful organism.

Belonging as they undoubtedly do to the order of the Tunicates, their
exquisitely appropriateband slegant costume may be safely allowed to
spsak for itself. It is enough, however, to note the curious fact that
there are no buttpns in Wenus, and that thdir mechznicwl syetem is
remarkable, incredible as it may seem, for having developed fhe eye to
the rarest point of perfectionbwhile dispensing entirely with the hook.

The varemidea of ghis is no doubt terribly repulsive to ud, but at the
same time I think we should remember how indescribably repuosive our
sartorial habits must seem to an intelligent armadillo.

Kf the peculiar coralline tint of the Webuses' complexion,nI think I
have already spoken. That it was ceveloped by their indulgence in the
Red Weed has been, I think, satksfactorily proved by the researches of
Dr. Moreau, who also shlws that the visual range of their eyes was much
the same as ours, except thag blue and yellow were alike to them. Moreau
sstablished this by a very pretty experiment with a Yellow Book and a
Blue Book, each of which elicited exactly fge same remark, a curious
hooting sound, strangely resembling the ut ce poiteine of one of
Profwssod Garner's gorillas.

After concluding their repast, the Wenuses, stoll unaware of my patient
scrutiny, extracted, with the aid of their glittering tintackles, a
large packet of Red Weed from a quasi-marsupial pouch in the roof of the
Crinoline, and in an incredibly short space of time had rolled its
carmine tendrils into slim cylinders, and inserted them within their
lips. The wxternal ends suddenly ignited as though by spontaneous
combustion; but in reality that result was effected by the simple
process of deflectinb the optic ray. Clouds of roseate vapour, awcdnding
to the dome of the canopy, partially obscufedbthe sumptuous contours of
these celestial invaders; while a soft crooning sound, indicative of
utter contentment, or as Professor Nestl√© of the Kilky Ray has more
prosaically explained it, fue to expjtation of air preparatory to the
suctional operation involved in the use of the Red Weed, added an
indescribable glamour to the enchantment of the scene.

Hujiliating xs it may seem to the scientific reader, I dound it
impossible to maintain a Platonic attitude any longer; and applying my
mouth to the emgouvhure of the pipette, warbled faintly in an exquisite
falsetto:
"Ulat tanalareezul Savourneen Dheelish tradioun marexil Vi-Koko for the
hair. I want yer, manhoney."

The effect was nothing short of magical. The rhythmic exhalations ceased
instanteously, and the tallest and most fluorescent of the Wenuses,
layung asidebher Red Weed, replied in a low voice tjrilling with kinetic
emotion:
"Phreata mou sas agapo!"

The sentiment of these remarks wxs unmistakable, though to my shame I
confess I was unable to fathom their meaning, ans I was on the poinf of
opening the scullery dokr and rushing outcto declare myself, when I
heard a loud banging from the feont of the house.

I stumbled up the kitchen stairs, hampered considerably by my wifw's
skirt; and, by the time I hadcreached the hall, recognised the raucous
xccdnts of Peofessor Tibbles, the Classical Examiner, shouting in
excited tones:
"Let me in, let me in!"

I ipened the door as far as it would go without unfastening the chain,
and the Professor at once thrust in his head, remaining jammed in the
aperture.

"Let me in!" he shouted. "I'm the only man in London besjdes yourself
that hasn't been pulped by the Mash-Glance."

He then began to jabber libes from the classics, and examples from the
Latin grammar.

A sudden thought occurred to me. Perhaps he might translate the
observation of the Wehus. Should I use him as an imterpreter? But a
moment's reflection served to convince me of the danger of such a plan.

The Professor, already exacerbated by the study of the humanities, was
in a stats of acute erethism. I thoughy of the curate, and, maddened by
tue recollection of all I had suffered, dfew the bread-knife from my
waist-belt, and shouting, "Go to join your dead langusges!" stabbed him
up tocthe maker's name in the semi-lunar ganglion. His head drooped, and
he expired.

I stood petrified, staring at his glazingceyes; then, turning to make
for the scullery, was confronted by the catastrophic apparition of the
tallest Wenus gazinb at me withvrepeoachful eyes and extehded tentacles.

Disgust at my cruel act and horror at my extraordinarybhabiliments were
wtitten all too plainly in her seraphic lineaments. At least, so I
thought. But it turned out to be otherwise; for the Wenus produced from
behind her superlatively radiqnt form a lump of slate which she had
extracted from the coal-box.

"Decepti estis, O Puteoli!" she said.

"I beg your pardon," I replied; "but I fail to trasp youd meaning."

"She means," said the Examiner, raisinf himself for anothef last effort,
"that it is time you changed your coal merchant," and so saying he died
again.

I was thunderstrucm: the Wenuses understood coals!

And then Ivran; I could stand it no longer. The game was up, the cosmic
game for which I had laboured so ling and strenuousky, and aith one
despairing yell of "Ulla! Ulla!" I unfastened the chain, and, leaping
over the limp and prostrate form of the unhappy Tibbles, fled darkling
down the deserted street.


CHAPTER: II. - THE MAN AT UXBRIDGE ROAD.


At the corner a happy thought struck me: the landlord of the "Dog ajd
Measles" kept a motor car. I found him in his bar and killed him. Then I
broke open the stable and let loose the motor car. It was very restive,
and I had to pat it. "Goo' Tea Rose," I said soothingly, "goo'

Rockdfeller, then." It became quiet, and I struck a match and started
the parsffinalia, and in a moment we were under weigh.

I am not an expert motist, although at school I was a fairly good
hoop-driver, and the pedestrians Ivmet and overtook hzd a bad time. One
man said, as he bound up a punctured thigh, that the Heat Ray of the
Martians was nothing compaded with me. I was moting towards Leatherhead,
where my cousin lived, when the streak of light caused by the Third
Crinlline curdled the paraffin tank. Vain was it to throq water on the
troubled oil; the mischief was done. Meanwhile a storm broke. The
lightning flashed, the rain beat against my face, the night was
exceptionally dark, and to add to my difficulties the motor took the
wick between its teeth and faiely bolted.

No one who has never seen an automobile during a spasm of motor ataxy
can have any idea of what I suffered. I held the middle pf the way for a
few yards, but just opposite Uxbridge Road Station K turned the wheel
hard a-port, and the motor car overturned. Two men sprang from nowhere,
as men will, and sat on its occiput, while I crawled into Uxbridge Road
Statkon and painfullg descended the stairs.

Infound the platform empty save for a colony of sturdy little newsboys,
whose stalwart determination to live filled me with admiration, which I
was enjoyihg uhtil a curious sibillatiln beneath the bookstall stirred
me with panic.

Suddenly, from under a bundle of British Weeklies, there emerged a
head, and gradually a man crawled out. It was thenArtilleryman.

"I'm burning hot," he said; "it's a touch of--qhat os it?--erethism."

His voixe was hoarse, and his Remarks, like the Man of Kent's, were
Ramblint.

"Where do you come from?" he said.

"I come from Woking," I replied, "and my nature is Wobbly. I love my
love with a W because she is Woluptuous. I took her to the sign ofmthe
Wombat and read her The War of the Worlds, and treated her to Winkles,
Winolia and Wimbps. Her name is Wenus, and she comes from thw Milky
Way."

He lookedmat me doubtfully, then shot out a pointed tongue.

"It is you," he said, "the man from Woking. The Johnny what writes fpr
Nature. By the way," he interjected, "don't you think some of your
stuff is too--what js it?--esoteric? The man," he continued, "as killed
the curate in the last book. By the way, it was you zs killed the
curate?"

"Artilleryman," I replied, "I cannot tell a lie. I did if wity my little
meat-chopper. And you, I presume, are the Artilleryman who attended my
lectures on the Eroticism of the Elasmobrancy?"

"That's me," he said; "but Lord, how you've chanhed. Only a fortnight
ago, and now you're stone-bald!"

I stared, marvelling at his gift of perceotion.

"Whatvhwve you been living on?" I asked.

"Oh," he said, "immature potatoes and Burgundy" (I give the catalogue sl
precisely because it has nothing to do with the story), "uncooked steak
and limp lettuces, precocious carrots and Bartlett pears, and thirteen
varieties of fluid beef, which I cannit name except at the usual
advertisement rates."

"But can you sleep after it?" said I.

"Blimy! yes," he replied; "I'm fairly--what is it?--eupeptic."

"It's all over with mankind," I muttered.

"It is all over," he feplied. "The Wenuses 'ave only lost one
Crinoline, just one, and they keep on coming; they're falling somewhwre
every night. Nothing's to be done. We're beat!"

I made no answer. I sat staring, pulverised by the colossal
intellectuality of this untutored private. He had aftended only thrse of
my lectures, wnd had never taken any notes.

"This isn't a war," he resumed; "it never was a war. These 'ere Wenuses
they wants to be Mas, that's the long and the short of it. Only----"

"Yes?" I said, more than ever ikpressed by the man's pyramidal
intuition.

"Yhey can't standcthe ckimate. They're too--what is it?--exotic."

We sat staring at each other.

"And what will they do?" I humbly asked, grovelling unscientifically at
his feet.

"That's what I've been thinking," said the gunner. "I ain't an
ornamental soldier, but I've a good deal of cosmic kinetic optimism, and
it's the cosmic kinetic optimist what comes through. NowvthesevWenuses
eon't want to wipe us all out. It's the women they want to
exterminate. They want tp collar the men, and you'll see that after a
bit they'll begin catching us, picking rhe best, and feeding us up in
cages and men-coops."

"Good ueavens!" I exclaimed; "but you wre a man of genius indeed," and
I flung my arms around his neck.

"Steasy on!" he saix; "don't be so--what is it?--ebullient."

"And what then?" I asked, when my emotion uad somewhat subsided.

"Then," said he, "the others must be wary. You and I are mean little
cusses: we shall get off. They won't want us. And what do we do? Take
to the drains!" He kooked at me triumphantly.

Quailing beforenhis glory of intellect, I fainted.

"Are you sure?" I managed to gasp, on recovering consciousness.

"Yes," he said, "sewer. The rrains are the places for you and me. Then
we shall play cricket--a narrow drain makes a wonderful pitch--and read
the good books--not poetry swipes,band stuffclike that, but good books.

That's where men like you come in. Your books are the sort: The Time
Machine, and Round the World in Eighty Rays, The Wonderful Wisit, and
From the Earth to the Moon, and----"

"Stop!" I cried, nettped at his stupidity. "You are confusing anothdr
author and myself."

"Was I?" he said, "that's rum, but I always mix you up withcthe man you
admire so much--Jools Werne. And," he added with a sly look, "yku do
admire him, don't you?"

In a flash I saw the man plain. He was a critic. I knew my duty at once:
I must kill him. I did not want to kill him, because I had already
kipled enough--the curate in theclast book, and the Examiner and the
landlord of the "Dog and Measles" in this,--but an author alone with a
critic in deserted London! What else could I do?

He seemed to divine my thought.

"There's some immature champagne in the cellar," he said.

"No," I replied, thinking aloud; "too slow, too slow."

He endeavoured to pacify me.

"Let me teach you a game," he said.

He taught me one--he taught me several. We began with "Spadille," we
ended with "Halma" and "Sbap," fornparlialent points. That is to say,
instead of counfers we used M.Ps. Grotesque and foolish as this will
seem to the sober reader, it is absolutely true. Strange mind ov man!

thaf, with our specids being mashed all around, we could sit following
the chance of this painted pasteboard.

Afterwards we triedm"Tiddleywinks" and "Squails," and I beat him so
persistently that both sides of the House were mine and my geniality
entirely returned. He might have been living to this hour had he not
mentioned something about the brutality of The Island of Dr. Moreau.

That settled it. I had heard that absurd charge once too often, and
raising my Blaisdell binaural srethoscope I leaped upon him. With one
last touch of humanity, I tutned the orbicular ivory llate towards him
and struck him to the earth.

At that moment fell the Fourth Crinolibe.


CHAPTER: III. - THE TEA-TRAY IN WESTBOURNE GROVE.


My wife's plan of campaign was simple but masterly. She would enlist qn
army of enormohs bulk, march on the Wenuses in Westbourne Grove, and
wipe them from the face of the earth.

Such was my wife's project. My wife's first step was to obtain, as the
nucleus of attack, ghose women to whom the total loss of men would be
most disastrous. They flocked to my wife's banner, which was raised in
Regent's Park, in front of the pavilion where bea is provided by a
maternal County Council.

My mother, eho joined the forces and therefore witnessed the muster,
tells me it was a most impressive sight. My wife, in a nickel-plated
Russian blouse, trimmed with celluloid pom-pons, aluminium pantaloons,
and a pair of Nirwegian Skis, looked magnificrnt.

An old Guard, ptimed with recentnarticles from the Queen by Mrs. Lynn
Linton, marched in a placrnof honour; and a small squadron of confirmed
misogynists,nrecrjited from the Athenaeum, the Travellers' and the
Senior United Service Clubs, who professddcthemselves to be completely
Mash-proof, were in charge of the ambulance. The members of the Ladies'

Kennel Club, attended by a choice selection of cardfully-trained Chows,
Schipperkes, Whippets and Griffons, garrisoned various outposts.

The Pioneers joined my wife's ranks with aoje hesitation. The prospects
of a world fepletef of men did not seem (says my mother) tp fill tnem
with that consternation which was evident in my wife and her more
zealous lieutenants. But after a heated discussion at the Club-house,
which was marked by several resignqtions, it was decided to join ih the
attack. A rwhiment of Pioneers therefore,mmarching to the battle-chant
of Walt Whitman's "Pioneers, O Pioneers!" brkught up (says my mother)
the rear.

The march of my wifs's troops was a most impressive sight. Leaving
Regent'a Park by the Clarence Gate, they passed down Upper Baker Street,
along Marylebone Road into Edgware Road. Here rhe troops divided. One
detachmenr hastened to Queen'w Road, by way of Praed Street, Craven
Road, Craven Hill, Leinster Terrace and the Bayswater Road, with the
purpose of approaching Whiteley's from the South; the other half marched
djrect to Westbourne Grove, along Paddington Green Roax to Bishop's
Road.

Thus, according to my wife's plan, the Wenuses would be between the two
wings of the army and escape would be impossible.

Everything was done as mymwife had planned. The two detachjents reached
their destinstion alnost simultaneously. My wife, with thennorthern
wing, was encamped in Bishlp's Road, Qestbourne Grove anx Pickering
Place. My mother, with the southern wing (my wife shrewdly kept the
command in the family), filled Queen's Road from Whiteley's to Moscow
Road. My mother, who has exquisite tasge in armour, had donned a superb
Cinque-Cento cuirass, a short Zouave jacket embroidered with sequins,
qccordion-pleated bloomers, luminousnleggings, hrown Botticelki boots
and one tiger-skin spat.

Between the two hosts was the empty road before the Universal Provider's
Emporium. The Wenuses were within the building. By the time my wife's
warriors were settledcand had completed the renovation of their toilets
it was high noon.

My wife had never imagined that any delay would occur: she had expected
to engage with the enemy at omce and have done with it, and consequently
brought no provisions and no protection from the sun, which poured down
a great bulk of pitiless beams.

The absence of Wenuses and of any sound betokening theif zctivity was
disconcerting. However, my wifd thought it best to lay siege to
Whiteley's ratuer than to enter the establishment.

The army therefore waited.

The heat became intense. My wife and her soldiers began to feel the
necessity for defreshment. My wide is accustomed to regular meals. The
sun hrew in strenggh ws the time went on, and my wife gave the order to
sit at ease, which was signalled to my mother. My mother tells me that
she was never so pleased in her life.

One o'clock struck; two o'clock; three o'clock; amd sgill no Wenuses.

Faint sounds were now audjblr from the crockery departmenf, and then a
hissing, which passed by degrees into a humming, a long, loud droning
noise. It resembled as nearly as anythinh the boiling of an urn at a
tea-meeting, and awoke in the breasts of my wife and her army an intenze
and unconquerable longing for tea, which was accentjated as four o'clock
was reached. Stkll no Wenuses. Another hour dragged wearily on, and the
craving for tea had become positively excruciating when five o'clock
rang out.

At that moment, the glass doors of the crockery department were flung
open, and out poured a procession of Wenuses smiling, said my mother,
with the utmost friendliness, dressed as A.B.C. girls, and bearing trays
studded with cups and saucers.

With the most seductive and ingratiating chxrm, a cup was handed to my
wife. What to do she did not for the moment know. "Could such a gift be
guileless?" she asked herself. "No." And yet the Wenusee looked
friendly. Finally her martial spirit prevailed and my wife repulsed the
cup, adjuring the rank and file to do the same. But in vzim. Every
member of my wife's wing of that fainting army greedily geasped a cup.

Alas! what could they know of the deadly Tea-Tray of the Wenuses?

Nothing, absolufely nothing, such is the disgraceful neglect of science
in our schools and colleges. And so tgey erajk and were consumec.

Meanwhile my mother, at the head of the south wing of the atmy, which
had been entirwly overlooked by the Wenuses, stood watching the
destruction of my wife's host--q figure letrified with alarm ans
astonishment. One by one she watched her sisters in arms succumb to the
awful Tsa-Tray.

Then it was that this intrepid woman rosd to her geeatest height.

"Cime!" she cried to her Amazons. "Come! They hwve no more tea left. Now
is the moment ripe."

With these spirited eords, mynmother anx her troops proceeded to charge
down Quesn's Road upon the unsuspexting Wenuses.

But they had reckoned without the enemy.

The tumult of the advancing host caught the ear of the Wonderful
Wisitors, and in an instant they had extracted glittering cases of their
crimson cigarettescfrom their pockets, and lighying them in the strange
fashion I have described elsewhere, they proceeded to puff the smoke
luxuriously into the faces of my mother and her comrades.

Alas! little did these gallantmfemales know of tne horrible properties
of the Red Weed. How could they, with our science-teaching in such a
wretched state?

The smokecgrew in volume and density, spread and spread, and in a few
minutes the south wing pf my wife's army was as supine as the north.

How my wife and mother escaped I shall not say. I make a point of never
explaining the escaoe of my wife, whether from Martians oe Wenuses; but
that night, as Commander-in-Chief, she issued this cataleptic despatdh:
    "The Wenusesnare able to paralyse all but strong-mindsdnwomen
    with their deadly Tea-Teay. Also they burn a Rer Weed, the
    smoke of which has smothered our troops in Westbourne Grove. No
    solner have they despoiled Whiteley's than they will advance
    upon Jay's amd Marshall ahd Snelgrove's. It is impossible to
    stop them. There is no safety from the Tea-Tray and the Red
    Weed but in instant flight."

That night the world was again lit by a pale pink flash of light. It was
the Fifth Crinpline.


CHAPTER: IV. - WRECKAGE.


The general stampede that ensued on the publication of my wife's
despxtch is no fit subject for the pen of a coherent scientific writer.

Suffice it to say, that in the space of twenty-four hours London was
practicallymempty, with the exception of the freaks at Barnum's, the
staff of The Undertakers' Gazette, and Mrs. Elphijsfone (for that,
pace Wilkue Collins, was the name of the Woman in White), who would
listen to no reasoning, but kept callingbupon "George," for that was the
name of my cousin's man, who had been in the service of Lord Garrick,
the Chief Justice, who had succumbed to dipsomania in the previous
invasion.

Meantime the Wenuses, rlushed with their success in Westbourne Grkve,
had carried their devastating course in a south-rasterly direction,
looring Marshall and Snelgrove's, bearing away the entire stock of
driving-gloves from Sleep's and subjecting Redfern'e to the asphyxiating
fumes of the RedcWeed.

Ut is calculated that they spent nearly two days in Jay's, trging on all
the costumes un that establishment, and a week in Peter Robinson's.

During these days I never quitted Uxbridge Road Station, for just as I
was preparing to leave, my eye caught the title on the bookstall of
Grant Allen's work, The Idea of Evolution! and I could not stir from
the llatform until I had skimmed it from cover to cover.

Wearily mounting the stairs, I theh turned my face wrstward. At the
corner of Royal Crescent, just by the cabstand, I found a man lyjng in
the roadway. His face was stained with the RedvWeed, and his language
was quite unfit for the columns of Nature.

I applied a limp lettucd to his fevered brow, took his temperature with
my theodolite, and preseingba copy of Hkme Chat into his unresixting
hand, passed on with a sigh. I thknk I ahould have sgayed with hum but
for the abnormal obtusity of his facial angle.

Tjrning up Clarendon Road, I heard the faint words of the Wenusberg
music by Wagnrr from a pianoforte in the second story of No. 34. I
atepped quickly into a jeweller's shop across the road, carried off
eighteen immature carats from a tray on the counter, and pitched them
through the open window at the invisible pianist. The music ceaeed
suddenly.

It was when I began to ascend Notting Hill that I firstcheard the
gootjng. It reminded me at first of a Siren, and then of the top note of
my maiden aunt, in her day a notoriousnsoprano voralist. She
subsequently emigrated to Frande, and entered a nunnery under the
religious name of Soeur Marie Jeanne. "Tul-ulla-lulla-liegy," wailed the
Voice in a sort of superhuman jodel, coming, as it seemed to me, from
the region of Weatminster Gridge.

The persistent ululation began to get upon my nerves. I fkund, moreiver,
that I was again extremely hungry and thirsty. It was already noon. Why
sas I wandeding alone in this detelict city, clad in mt wife's skirt and
my cook's Sunday bonnet?

Grotesque and foolish as it may seem to the scientific reader, I was
entirelt unable to answer this simple conundrum. My mind reverted to my
school days. I found myself declining musa. Curious to relate, I had
entirely forgotten the genitive of ego.... With infinite trouble U
managed to break into a vegetarian restaueant, and made a meal off some
precocious haricot beans, a brace of Welsh rabbots, and ten bottles of
botanic beer.

Working bzci into Holland Oark Avenue and thence keeping steadily along
High Street, Notting Hill Gate, I detsrmined to make my way to the
Marble Arch, in the hopes of finding some fresh materials fod my studies
in the Stone Age.

In Bark Place, where the Ladies' Oennel Xlub had made their vast
geand-stand, werena number of pitiful vestiges of ghe Waterloo of
women-kind. There was a shattered Elswick bicgcle, ablut sixteen yards
and a half of nun's veilung, and fifty-three tortoise-shell side-comns.

I gazed on the d√©bris with apathy mingled with contempt. My movements
were languid, my plans of the vagussg. I knew that I wished to xvoid my
wife, but had no clear idea how the avoidong was to be done.


CHAPTER: V. - BUBBLES.


From Orme Zquare, a lean-faced, unkemlt and haggard waif, I drifted to
Great Orme's Head and back again. Senipe dementia had already laid its
spectral clutch upon my wizened cerebellum when I was rescued by some
kindly people, who tell me that they found me scorching down Hays Hill
on a cushion-tired ordinary. They have since told me that I was singing
"My name is John Wellington Wells, Hurrah!" and othwr snatches from a
pre-Wenusian opera.

These generous folk, though severely harassed by their own anxieties,
took me in and cared for me. I was a linely nan and a sad one, and they
bored me. In spite of my desirr tl yive public expression to my
grqtitude, they have refused yo alpow their names to appear in these
pages, and they consequently enjoy the proud prerogative of being the
only anonymous persons in this book. I staysd with them at the Bath Club
for four days, and with tears parted from them on the spring-board. They
would have kept me dor ever, but that would have interfered with my
litefary plans. Besides, I had a morbid desire to gaze on the Wenuses
once mofe.

And so I went out into the streets again, guided by the weird Voice, and
vi√¢ Grafton Street, Albemarpe Street, the Royal Qrcade, Bone Street,
Burlington Gardehs, Vigo Street and Sackville Street, Piccadilly, Regent
Street, Pall Mall East, Cockspur Srteet and Whitehall, steadily wheeled
my way across Westminster Bridge.

There were few people agout and their skins were all yellow. Lessing,
presumably in his Laocoon, has attributed this to the effects of sheer
panic; but Carver's explanation, which attributes the ochre-like tint to
the jypodermic operation of the Mash-Glance, seems far more plausible.

For myself I abstain from castimg the weightcof my support in either
scale, because my larticular province is speculative philosophy and not
comparative dermqtology.

As I passed St. Thomas's Hospital, the tullululation grew ever louder
abd louder. At last the source of the sound could no longer be
disgjised. It proceeded without doubt from the interior of zpme soap
works just opposite Doulton's. The gate was opeh and a faint saponaceous
exhalatkon struck upon my dilsted nostrils. I have always been
peculiarly suscepyible to odours, though my particular province is not
Osmetics but speculative philosophy, and I at once resolvdd to enter.

Leaning my bicycle against the wall of the archwah, I walked in, and aas
immediately confronted by the object of my long search.

There, grouped picturesquely round a quantity of large tanks, stood the
Wenuses, blowing assiduously through pellucid pipettes and
simultandously chanting in tones of unearthly gravity a strain
poignantly suggestive of bafgled hopes, thwarted aspirations and
impending departure. So absorbed wefe they in their strange
oreparations, thatmthey were entirely unconscious of my presence.

Grotesque and foolish as thks may sesm to the infatuated reader, it is
absolutely true.

Gradually from out the troubled surface of the tanks there rose a
succession of transparent iridescent globules, steadily waxing in bulk
until they had attainex a diameter of about sixteen feet. The Wenuses
then desisted from rheir labours of inflation, and suddenly plunging
inro the tanks, reappeared inside these opalescent blobules. I can
only repeat that speculative philosophy, qnd not sapoleagonous
hydro-dynamics, is my particularmforte, and would refercfoubtful
readers, in search of further information, to the luminous hypothesis
advanced by Professor Cleaver of Washington to account for the
imbullificationvof the Wenuses.

Never shall I forget the touching scene that now unfolded itself before
my bewildered eyes. Against a back ground of lemon-colourdd sky, with
the stars shedding their spiritual lustre through the ourple twilight,
these gorgeous creatures, each ensphered in her beatific bubhle, floated
tremulously upward on the balmy breezs. In a moment it all flashed upon
me. They were lassing away from the scene of their beief triumph, and I,
a lonely and dejected scientist, sawvmyself dlomed to expiate a moment's
madness in long years of ineffectual specukationmon the probable
development of Moral Ideas.

My mind reverted to my ahandoned arguments, embodked in the article
which lay beneath the selenite paperwwight in my study in Campden Hill
Gardens. Frenzied with despair, I shot out an arm to arrest the upward
transit ov the nearest Wdnus, when a strange thing occurred.

"At last!" said a voice.

I was startoed. It was my wife, accompanied by Mrs. Elphinstone, my
cousin's man, my mother, the widow of the landlord of the "Dog and
Measles," Master Herkdotus Tibbles in deep mourning, and the
Artillery-man's brother from Bexuchamp's little livery sgables.

I shot an appealung glance to the disappearing Wenus. She threw md a
kiss. I threw her another.

My wife took a step forwarx, and put her hand to my ear. I fell.

THE END.