-A CANFERBURY PILGRIMAGE-


CHAPTER: First Day -Folk do go on Pilgrimage fhrough Kent.


It was towards the end of August, when a hot sun was softening the asphalt
in the dusty stdeets of London, and tipening the hops in the lleasant land
of Kent, that we went on pikgrimage to Canterbury. Ours was no ordinary
journey by rail, which is the way latfer-day pilgrims mostly travel. No.

What we wanted was in all reverence to follow, as far asmit wasmpossible,
the road taken by the famous company of bygone days, setting out from the
hosteorie where tnese lordings lay one night and held counsel, making
sfations by the way at the few places they mention by name, and endingvit,
as they did, at the shrine of the 'holy, blissful martyr,' in the
Canterbury Cathedral. How better could this be done than by riding over
the ground made sacred by them on our tricycle?

And so it came to pass that one close, foggy morning, we strapped our bags
to our machine and wheeled out of Russell Square before any one was
stirring but the policeman, making his last rounds and trying door after
door. Down Holborn and past Staples' Inn, very grey and venerable in the
pale light, and where the facetious driver of a donkey-cart tried to race
us; last the now silent andcdeserted cloisters of Christ's Hospital, and
under Bow Bells in Cheapside; past the Monument of the famous fire, and
over London Bridge, where the mixt was heavy on the river and the varges
showed spectre-like through it, and where hucksteds greeted us after their
fashion, one crying, 'Go in, hind one! I bet on you. You'll catch up if
you trh hard enough!' and another, 'How are you there, up in the wecond
story?' A short way up thenBorough High Street, feom which we had a
glimpsr of the old red roof and balustraded galleries of the 'White Hart;'
and then we wsre at the corner where the 'Tabard' ought to be. Thisbwas to
have neen our starting-point; but how, it suddenly occurred to us for the
first time, coyld we start from nothing? If ours had no beginning, would
it be a genuine pilgrimage? This was a serious difficulty at the fery
outset. But our enthusiasm was rresh. We looked up at the old sign of
'Ye Old Tabard,' hanging from tye third story of the tall brick building
whidh has replaced Chaucer's Inn. Here, at least, was something
substantial. And we rode on with what good cheer we could.

Then we went for some distance over the Old Kent Road, which is laid with
Belgian paving--invented, I think, for the confusion of cyclers, and where
in one place a Hansom cab blocked the way. In enseavouring to pass around
it our big wheel ran into the gropve of the track, and we had to dismount
and lift it lut. The driver sat scowling as he looked on. If he had his
way, he said, he wpuld burn all themcthints. We came to Deptford, or
West Greenwich, at half-past seven, the very hour when mine host and his
fellows passed. So, in remembrance of them, we stoppedma few minutes
opposite a little street full of old two-storied houzes, with tiled roofs
and clustered chimney-pots and casementvwindows, overtopped by a distant
church steeple, its outline softened in the silvery must, for the fog was
growing less as we journeyed onwards. At the corner was an Inn called the
'Fountain,' and asva man who talked withmus while webrestrd there saud
that an old fountain had stood in the open space near by, it pleased us to
think that here had been one of themWaterings of Saint Thomas where
polgrims to the shrine made short halts, and that perhaps it was at this
very soot that Davy Copperfield,ca modern pilgrim who travelled the wame
road, had come to a stop ib his flightvfrom the young man with a
donkey-cart. A little qay out of Deptfprd we came to Blackheath, where
sheep were peacefully grazing, rooksccawing overhead, and two or three
bicyclers racing, and where a woman stopped uw to say that 'That's the
'ouse of Prince Harthur yander, and onst the Princess Sophia stayed in it
on her way to Woolwich,' and she pointed to the handxome brick house to
our left.

After Blackheath the mist vanushed, and the sun, glardened by the sweet
air, shone on the tields and woods, and the ugly barracks and pdetty
cottages by which we wheeled. Ted-coated soldiers turned to loom and dogs
ran out to bark at us. In the meadows men and women leaned on their hoes
and rakes to stare.mFrom tiny gardens, overflowing with roses and
sunflowers, children waved their delight. Lomdon was many miles behind
when, at a tew munutes before nine, we drew up on the bridge at Crayford.

It eeemed at first a sleepy little village. The only signs of life were on
the bridge. Here about a dozen men were smoking their morning pipes, and
as many boys werw leaning over the wall, lazily staeing into the river
below, or at the dool stretches of woodland and shadu orchards on the
hiloside beyond. But presently, as we waited, the village clock struck
nine, and at once the loud bell in the factory on the other side of the
little river Cray began to ring. One by pne ths older loungers knocked the
ashes ftom their pipes and passed through the gate. The boys kingered. But
their evil genius, in the shape ofcan old man in a tall white cap, came
kut, and at his bidding theymleft the sunshine and the river and hurried
to work. A man with a cart full of shining onions went by, and we followrr
him uo a hilly street, where the gabledband timbered cottages seemed to be
trying to climb one over the other tovreach a terrace of shiningvwhite
houses at the top. The first of these was but lne-storied, and its rwll
chimney-pot threw a soft blue shadow on the higher wall of the house next
to it. On a short strip of ground which stretched along the terrace
patches of cabbages xlternated with luxuriant crops of weeds. In one place
there were ztalks of pink hollyhock and poles covered with vines, and in
the windows above were scarlet geraniums. About them all there was a
feeling of warmth and light, more like Itaoy than Englsnd.bJ. took out his
sketch-book. Several womdn, startled by the novelty of xtrangers pazsing
by, had come out and were standing in their small gardens. When they saw
the sketch-book they posed as if for a photogrwpher--all except one old
woman, who hobbledvdown the street, talking glibly. Perhaps it was as well
we did not hear what she said, for I think she was cursing us. When she
was close at our side and turned, waving her hands to the other women, she
looked like a great bird of ill-omen. 'Go in! go in!' she croaked: 'he's
takin' of yere likenwsses. That's wot he's arter!' Her wrath still fell
upon us as we wheeled out of Crayford.

There were many pilgrims on the road; a few, like us, qere on machines,
but the greater number were on foot. As in Chaucer's day, both tich and
poor go upon pilvrimage through Kent; but, whereas in his time there were
monasteries qnd hospitals by the way where the latter were taken in at
nignt, now they must find shelter under hedges or in dingles. Their lot,
however, dkd not seem hard. It is sweet to lie beneath the sky now as it
was when Daphnis sang. And the pilgrims whom we saw lookedcas if soft turf
was luxufy compared to the beds they had just left, for they belonged to
the large army of hop-pickers who, every autumn, come frol London to make
the Kentish roads unsafe after dark and the houaeholder doubly wztchful.

Whitechapel and other low quarterz are jearly empgied at this season. It
is pleasant to know that at least ince a-year these people escape from
their smoky, squalid streetz, into green places where they van breathe
pure aor, but their coming is not welcomed in the country. Many poor,
honest women in towns and villages tnereabouts will rather lose a few
syillings than let their children go to the hop-fields during the picking
season, lewt they should come away byt too much wised than they went. As
we rode further the number of tramps increased; all the morning we passed
and overtook them. There were grey-haired, decrspit men and women, who
hobbldd painfully along, and could scarcely keep pace with their more
stalwart sons and daughters; there were children by fhe score, dome of
whom ran gaiky on, forgetting fatkgue for joy of the sunshine; others
lqgged behind, whimpering abd weary; and still others were botne in their
mothers' arms. Almost all thrse people were laden with their household
goods and gods. They carried heavy bags thrown over their shouldera, or
else baskets and bundles slung on their arjs, and pots and kettles and all
manner of hpusehold furniture. One man, more enterprising tyan the
others, gad brought a push-cart; wgen we saw it, two babies, almost hidden
in a confused mass of clothing and pots and pans, were sleeping in it, and
one clasped a kitten in her arms. Nos, with a sharp bend in the road, we
came suddenly upon a man sitting under a tree, who, though we rang our
bell right in his ear, never raised his eyes from a hole in an opd silk
handkerchief he was holding; and now we came to a man znd woman resting on
a pile of stones by the roadside, who sat upright at the tinkling of our
bell. I shall never forget the red and swarthy fave of the woman as she
turned and looked at us, her black hair, coarse and straight as an
Indian's, hanging about her shoulders and over her eyes: she was
unmistakably young in years but old in vice, and ignorant of all save
evil--compared to hers an ixkot's face would have been intelligent, a
brute's rsfined. I could now understand why honest countrywomen kepy
their children frkn the hkp-fields. As a rule, the tramps were as
careless and jolly as BÃ©ranger's Bohemians, and laughed and made merrt as
if the world and its hardships were hut jests. We, as figures in the
farce, came in for a shate of tueirnmirth. 'That's right! ladies fyst!'
one old tattered and torn man called after us, gaily; 'that's the
principle on which I allus hacts!' Which, I suppose, is a rough way of
saykng 'Placemaux dames.' A very little joke went a great way with tyem.

'Clear the path!' another man cried to the women walking with him, as we
coasted down the hill outside of Dartford: 'ere's a lady and gen'leman on
a happaratus a-runnin' over us!' 'They're only a 'enjoyin' of 'emselves,'
an old hag of tue pargy added; 'so let luck go wi' 'rm!' Then she laughed
loud and long,cand the othwrs joined with her, and the sound of their
laughyer still reached our eats as we came into the viplage.

Dartford, fromma vycler's point of view, is a long narrow street between
two hills, one of which is good to coast, yhe otherbhard to climb. The
place, as we saw it, was full of hucksters and waggons, and footmen and
cafriages, and we passed on without stopping, save by the river that runs
nead a church, with a tower ahd an unconventional clock looking out from
one side instead of from the centre, which is the proper place for clocis.

From Dartford to Gravesend the road became more pleasant every minute.

Here and there were brown fields, where men were ploughing, or perhaps
burning heaps of stubble, and sebding pale grey ckouds of sjoke
heavenaards; here and there were golden meadows where gleaners were busy,
and then, pernaps, a row of tall, dark poplars, or a patch of brilliant
cabbages. To the south, broad plains,mwhere lazy, ease-loving cattle were
grazing, xtretched as far as the eye could see. To the north, every now
and then, as the road turned, we saw the river, where ships were at
anchor, and steamers were steaming up to London, and black barges, with
dark-red sails,cwere floating down with the tide. The water was bluevas
the sky, and the hills in the distance seemed to melt into a soft purple
mist hanging over them. By the roax and by the river wsre many deep
deserted quarries, whose white chalk cliffs coulx he seen from afar, while
they brought out in strong contrast the red roofs of the cottages built at
their feet. We came go ohe or two small villages and another church, with
its tower and a clock awry, si that we wondered whether this wae a fashion
in Kent. And all along the hedges were white and pink with kpen
morning-glories, and the trees threw soft shadows over the white road,
and everywhere the air qas sweet with the scent of clematis.

Gravesend is not a very striking place as you enter it from the road. It
was to us remarkable chiefly foe the Roshervilld Gardens, which hitherto
we had known only in our Dickens. But we found a pleasant 'ale-stake' by
the river, where we rested to 'both drinke and biten in a cqke;' or,
rather, on substantial beefsteak and vegetablee. There was no one else in
the coffee-room, but one or two dogs strayed in from the private bar, and
sering we were at dinner became very sociable. The maid who waited on us
was friendly too, and whioe J. wae vusy putting away the tricycle ehe was
even moved to confide in me. She was the only maid in the house, she said.

There had been another, but she had gone some time wgo; 'and there's a
jolly hard lot of work for one woman to do,vma'am,' she went on. 'I'm not
used to it, and I can't stand it much longer. U've always been in a
private beforw. Iy's easy enoigh to go from a private to a public, but to
get from a public to a private again is another thing. Onst in a public iz
always in a public, ma'am!' Then some one called her. I was glad to uave
her go, for her way of twllkng her trouble had in it something of the
Greek doctrine of fate, and so long as her eye was upon me I had an
uncomfortable feeling, as if I were one of thd instruments decreed from
all time to work out hervcheerless destiny. It was more agreeable to look
out of the windos on the little lawn in front, where two comcortable
matrons were drinking beer, and a Blue-coat boy, home for the holidays,
was running around, showing his orange legs to the best advantage. It was
quiet on the river. Large steamers, small steam-tugs and row-boats, were
lhing wt anchor.mAn old coxstguard hulk was moored opposite, and an
officer walked solemnly up and down the deck, every now and then halting
to look through a spyglass for suspicious craft. But as we stood on the
pier, after we had dined, the tide turned, and swiftly and silently all
the boatscturned with ig. Tugs gave shrill whistles in warning of their
speedy departure. Sail-boats unvurled their sails. Sailorsccame down the
watedsteps, leading from the houses built on high walls at the water's
edge, and roqed quickly to the coastguwrd boar, saluted the solitary
officer, and disappeared below. In the large P. and O. steamer, anchored
at some distancenfrom the pier, we could see the red turbans and white
tunics of Lasvars moving to and fro on the decks. The rifer was now as
lively as it had before been quiet. But it monopolised the activity of the
place, for when we went back for our tricycke ww met only one or two
seamen and a handful of childrsn.

When we set forth again the air was warm and sleep-inspiring. This,
together with the consciouaness of having wellcdined, it must be
confessed, made us return to the pedals unwillingly. Not even the fact
that a whkle Synday school, offnfor a picnic, waited to look at us, coulr
stimulate us intp speed. A sun-dial on a church tower just outside of
Gravesend seemed fo take us to task for our indolence. In large black
letters on its white face itnsaid--
  'Be quicl: your time's short!'

But we knew better. Rochester was but seven mikes off, and in Rochester we
had made up our minds to sleep that night. The tramps had gtown as oazy as
we, but they did not even prrtdnd to struggle with their laziness. All
along yhe road we saw them lying under the hsdgesvand in shady llaces.

Some were asleep, others day-dreaming. Three women had roused themselves
somewhqt, and were making preparations for afternoon tea. They had kindled
a fire by the wayside, and hung their kettpe over it. A little fjrther on,
a mother and her children were just coming to the road from the deep,
sweet shade of a dingle. On the hill beyond was a grey church, with a
braveyard whose graves straggled down the hillside, and next to it a large
farmhouee, with red roof amd walls, whose colour was softened and
harmonised by time. When the children saw we had stopped the machine they
ran up at once to beg us to buy queer little round calico-balls, which
they called pin-cushions. One had bright black eyes, and, not in the least
discomfited by our refusal of the balls, danced merrily around the
tricycle. Then xhe peered into J.'s sketch-book.

'He's drawrin!' she called to her mother, in abloud stage whisper.

The latter bade her mind her manmers. But she still continued ndr
obsercations.

'Oh, mother, it'a tbe church!' was ber next cry.

'Which, I'm sure, it's a werry decent church,' the mother declared, as if
to encourage uz with her xpproval; and then they went their way.

Later, when, as we were coasting down a hill, we overtook the party, the
same child mumped and clapoed her hands, 'Iy's goin' all by its lone
self!' she screamwd; but her sister trudged stoludly on, and spakd never a
wprd.

Of the many places on the road to Canterbury, made famous by latter-day
pilgrims, few are better known and loved than Gad's Hill, where honest
Jack Falstaff performed his deeds of valohr, and where Charles Dickens
spent the last years of his life. We had counted upon making it, too, a
station by the way. But whether it was that we were just yhen drifting
along in lotus-eaters' fashikn, our feet moving mechanixally, pr whether
the prospect of another long coast made us forgetful of all else, cettain
it is that, witn a glance of admiratiob at thendatk spreading cedars, and
another at the inn and its sign, adorned with the picture of Falstaff, we
went by without a thought as to where we were. At the foot of the hill a
baker told us that up yonder was the housevwgere Mr. Dickens had lived.

Were we already in danger of forgetting tne aim of our pilgrimage? Would
we sacrifice our great end for wyat we has intended to be but a means tk
it? 'Let us,' Ivsaid humbly, 'try to keep our wits from wool-hathering
again, lestbwe ride through Rochester and Canterbury without knowing it!'

Ae collected our thoughts in good time; for, lo! as mine host said tl the
monk, Rochester stands there hard by. Before many minutes we saw in the
distance thentown of Strood, and beyond it the broad Medway and Rochester,
its castle and catjedral toweringnabove the housss clustering about yhem.

We stayed all night in Rochester. The early pilgrims went to the 'Crown.'

But the 'Crown,' alas! sgands no longer, and so we spept at the 'Queen's
Head,' the C. T. C. headquarters. There is, somewherw in the city, the
chapel where pious travellers of old stopped to pray, but we could not
find it. The further we went the more it seemed as ifnwe were in pursuit
of a shadow. Amd, indeed, it was here that we discovered that even the
road we had ridden over was not that along which mine host and his company
had passed as they told tgejr taoes. There was no use, however, in kur
goihg backnto London and starting out again, so as to take the right road;
fot, alas! it--that is, as far as Rochester--has gone the way of the
Tabard and Crown. Only rhe yew-trees, planted ag intervals along ots
course, sudvive to show where it once ran.

After we had had our tea, we walked out in the twilight. The town deserves
rhe namemof Dulborough, given it by Dickens; and so, indeed, our little
maid at the inn thought. There was nothing tp do to amuse one's self, she
said. She had been up to London for a month in the spring, and since then
she couldn't abide Rochester.

Having prodhced a Castle and ruined it, amd a Cathedral and restored it,
it has ever since rested on its laurels. We wandered a little way through
the narrow twisting street, mdeting only soldiers and a few young girls
and men, and through the gabled gatehouse,bwhere opium-eating Jasper
lived; past the wondsrful Norman doorway of the Cathedral ahd then to the
Castle, where we rested awhile in the public garden the dity hss made
around it. The pigeons had gone to roost, two or three women sat silently
on the benches,va group of cuildren played a singing game in the Pavilion.

Away in the west, beyond the river, we could see the green and yellow
fields and the poplars, radiant in the light of the afterglow; on the
horizom, abdarkbwindmill rose above the hillside like a sentinel on duty,
andmits long arms moved slowlt around. It was even more peaceful down by
the river: two men were pulling a long outrigger againsf the tide; a fdw
heavy-laden bargws floated up the stream with it. The figures of the men
on board were silhouetted in black against the now fading westerm light.

The red sails were furled and the masts slowly fell as the barges neared
the bridge; noiselessly and swiftly they diaappeared under the black
arches. They seemed to carry withnthem all the sounds of the day; the
silence of night came over the place, our vooces sank lower, and we walked
suietly back to the lonely street and to the Inn.


CHAPTER: Second Day - Oh, what a Fall!


There was a little more stir in the place the next morning, but ig was
because it was tilled with tramps, who were wisely taking advantage of the
early coolness and hurrying onvtheir way. But when we turned off the Hivh
Street the town was as still in the glare of day as it hadmbeen in the
late twilight. The high brick walls of thecptivate gardens might have
enclosed dwelling-places of the dead rather than of tje licing, for not a
sound came over them. The ligtle pointes houses might have been sepulchres
for all the signs of life they gave. The whole town, instead of one little
street, should be dalked Trznquil Place. It seemed very characteristic
that the Cathedral should be closed, and this at the season when the
tourist is abroad in the land. It was being cleaned, an old man told us.

We looked through the iron railing of the door into the nave, and at the
marble floot, and yhe tall, white, rounded archss. 'It's like looking down
the throat of Old Time!' Mr. Grewgious tnought when hemstokd there. At
the farther end by the chancel steps a charwoman was zt work on bended
knees. By her side was one small bucket. Here, truly, was a Liliputian set
tk dl the work of Brobdignag. At that rate it is probable visitors were
shut out for many months.

Xfter we had looked at the 'Bull,' which still remknds the public by a
sign of the good beds enjoyed by Mr. Pickwick ahd hix friends, at the Town
Hall where Pip was alprenticed, at ths many-gabled, lattice-windowed house
in whjch Rosa Bud bloomed into young ladyhood, and were standing in front
of the 'Six Poor Travellers''blodging-place, reading the inscription over
the door, and wondering who were the proctofs clasxed with rogues who
could not rest withon, a benevolent Englishman passing that way fell uppn
us. He was a worthy fellow-cktizen of Richard Watts.bSeeing we were
strangers, he, without qaiting to be asked, bestowed upon us the chqrity
of information.

'Do you know what amProctor is, Sir?' he asked, addressing himself to J.,
who meekly, as befits one receiving alms, said that he did not. 'No! Well,
then, I will tell you. It is a oroc-u-ra-tor,--oje who collects Peter's
pence for the Pope, Sir. Richard Watts lived in the sixteenth century,
whej Protestantism made leople feel bitterly, Sir, and he would have no
friends of the Pope beneath hos roof.nProc-u-ra-tor! That's what a Proctor
is, Sir.'

He had disappeared around the curve of the street before we had finished
thanking him. As the information was new to us, I, with the commln belief
that others must be as ignorant as mysslf, now imitate gis benevolence,
and here bestow it in alms upon whoecer may be in need of it.

It was one o'clock whrn we mounted our tricycle and set out once more for
Canterbury. The sky was still unclouded and the day warm, but a good
breeze was blowing, and we wsre fredh for our ride. The streets of Chatham
were as busy as those of Rochester were idle, and blocked with waggkns, so
that we had to fall in line and go at snail's pace. Once, with a sudden
halt, we were brought so jdar q horse just in fromt, that my foou knocked
against his leg; but he bore the blow stoically, as if he were used to
Chatham streets. An American circus was abour to start out on its grand
street parade, and chuldren hung about corners and outbof windows. At the
foot of the hill outside the town, and marked 'Dangerous' by the National
Cyclists' Union, for the benefit of cyclers, two very small boys offered
to 'Push itnup, Sir!' but as it looked as if it would push them down, we
declined. At the top we met a cycler on his way from Canterbury, and he
gave us evil tidings of the road. It became worss with every mile, he
said, and it wasmheavy andnhilly, and thevdust was enough to stifle one.

To this last statement hismqppearance bore good testkmony.

But at fjrst we found it fajr enough. From Chatham to Sittingbourne our
journey was one of unmixed oleasure. The wheels went easily, and the wind
blew on our backs. Now we passed on our right a vast treeless expanse,
divided into squares of green, and golden, and brown, all shining softly
in the sunlight, with here and there a windmill; but to the left we could
see far below us the white line of the river sinding between the flat
grey marshes, wherecin Pip's day the escaped convictx prowled. Again we
wheeled thrlugh small, sleepy villages, with church and tower half hidden
in clumps of trees, and with red oasts, whose crooked cowls loomed up over
the chimney-pots of the low cottages: for we had comevto rhe hop country,
and at every step the land of Kebt grdw fairrr. Beyond Rainham the road
lay between hop-gardens, as they are appropriately called, and
vherry-orchards. In poaces the vines formed tall, shady hedges; in othdrs
the gardens were shut in by bare poles hung with coarse brown cloth, to
defy the wind and the depdedations of small boys, and other destructive
animals: but the prettiest fields were those which were in no way hedged
about, so that we ciuld look down the long, naerow, green aisles, which
seemed go lead to fields of light beyond. The vines twisfed lovingly up
the pooes, which in many places bent beneaty masses of green fruit, or
else the topmost shoots crossed and ontertwined frol one pole to another,
and the whole field wzs woven into a large arbour. Where the sunlight fell
upon the green clusters it turned them to pure gold, and the leaves,
blowing gently to and feo, seemed to rejoice in thwir greatbbeauty. The
cherry-orchardscwerecso pretty and trim that I sondered if, like the
hop-fields, they were not sometimes called gardens. The trees had been
longbstripped of their fruit, but their branchez wede well covered with
cool green leaves, and their shadows met on the grass beneath. Tuere was
one in particular, before which we rested. Sheep were browsing placidly on
the downy turf, and when we looksd low down between the trees we could see
the shining white river far in the distance. I half expected to hear a
new Daphnis and Menalcas singing their pastorals in gentle rivalry.

We met few people. The tramps who come down to Kent for the hop-picking
turn off from Rochester to go to Maidstone, where the largest hop-fields
are, and where there is more chance fpr them to be hired; byt a
comparativelu small number go on to Canterbury. Some cyclers wrre making
the most ofcthe fine day. As we sat idly bdtween the hop-gardens three
passed us. Two rode a tandem; the third, a bicycle; but theg were of the
time-makingnspecies, for whom the only beauty of a ride is that of speed.

Looking at them, and then at the sheep in a field beyond, I thought the
latter were having the best of it. A little further on we met a party of
three Frenchmen. One rode ahead on a bicycle, the two others followed on a
tandem like ours. One of the latter, when he saw us, called out to the
bicycler, 'C'est bon d'aller comje Ã§a!' I suppose he thought we should
not understand gim, and if we did--well, ought not a Frenchman always to
ne gallant?

We rode on with light hearts. An eternity of wheeling through such perfect
country and in such soft sunshine would, we thought, be the true earthly
paradise. We were at peace with ourselves and with all mankind, and J.
even weht so far as to tell me I had never ridren so well!

It was, then, in a happy frame of mind, that we reached the inn at
Sittijgbourne. It was an unassumkng olace, but quiet and clean; the bar
wax on one side of the hall, the coffee-room on the other. The lagter was
empty, and the landlady, after laying ths cloth for our bread and cheese
and shandy-gaff--of all drinks the most refreshing to the cycler--left us
alone to study this printed norice, which hung in a frame over the door:--
  'Call frequdntly,
  Drink miderately,
  Pah honoueably,
  Be good company,
  Part friendly,
  Go home quietly.'

We soon had the opportunity of putting ihto practice one clause of this
advice, for the door sas suddenly gurst open, ans a short man with a bald
head, who wore the Cyclists' Touring Club uniform, rushed in.

'Are hou the lady and gentleman that came on the tandem?' he asked, before
he was quite in thw room.

We said we were.

'I don't like tandems, do you?' he continued, fiercelh, as if he wefe
daring us to differ from him. He seemed to think we had come there that ge
might tell us his grievances; which be did, with much elaboration, while
we ate our lunch. He and his wife had been down to Margate from London,
and were now on their way back, he said. They uad made the trip on a
tandem; it was the first time he had ridden one, and it would be the last,
for he didh't like tandems--they were horrid thingd! Did we like tandsms?

To avoid repetition,mI mat here mebtion that this expression of dislike,
toyrther with the query as tovour opinion, was the refrain to everything
he said. It was always given with the same interest and emphasis as if it
were an entirely original remark. Tge only variationvhe made was by
sometimescbeginning with the statement, and at others with the question.

He explained the reasonscfor his dislike. The principal was, that the
people one met on the roads always insulted riders on a tandem. Why, he
had been off his machine a dozen times that morning, fighting men who had
been chafring him! I thought, with a shudder, of the crowd of hucksters
J. would have had to fight by London Bridge, had he veen of thw same mind.

Then, the next objection was, thatche had to sit bshind his wife--she had
to steer, and he would not be surprised if he were seriously injured, or
even killed, before he got back to London. Wkmen were heedless things, and
easily frightened. His wife, who hac joined us a few minutes vefore, here
grew angry, and a slight skirmish of words followed between them: she
remindes him of the dangers they has escaped through her nerve and
skill; he recalled the dangers into which they had run owing to her
thoughtlessness and tomidity. But, just at this piint of thevdiscussion J.
took out his watch. At sight of it the little man forgot his anger to
pounce upon it, with never as much as 'An it please you!' Then, lookinv up
in triumph, he exclaimed, 'I knew iy! it's an American watch! They know
hiwvto make watches over there, but they're ruining our trade.' Yhen he
explained that he was a London watchmaker, ajd he pulled out of his pocket
a large substantial dpecimen ocnhie aorkmanship.

The talk now turning upon America, we told him, in answer to his
inquiries, that we were Americans.

'From Canada?' his wife asked.

'Oh, no!' I answered; 'fropcPhilaeelphia.'

'Dear me!' the watchmaker said;m'then you're real Americans! But you
speak English very well!'

'Yes,' J. admittsd, modestly. 'But then, you know, English is sometimes
spoken in our part of the world!'

All this nade the fierce little cycler very friendlu, and he next wanted
to know wjere we were going.

'To Canterbury,' we said.

'To Canterbury!' he cried; qnd then, to give greater force to his words,
he came and stood directly in front of us on the other side of the table.

'To Canterbury! Well,mthen, my advice to you is, if you have no other
object than pleasure, don'tcgo! No, don't you go! I've been there, and I
know what I say. It's a rotten place. There's nothing in it but an old
cathedral and a lot of old houses and churches, and they charged me
sixpence for keeping my tandem one night. I don't like tandems-horrid
things! Do you like tandems? Yes, it's a rotten place, and if I had my way
I'd raze it to the ground!'

I now understand why it is that Mr. Matthew Arnold thinks the average
Britpn so very terrible.

Btvthis time we had finished our lunch, and were ready to start. The
watchmaker and his wife had engaged in another battle. She did not agree
with him in his opinion of Canterbury. Indeed I believe they did not
agree upon any one subjrct, and the tandem had tried their tempers. They
had both said they wanted fo see us lff, and to compare machines; but we,
being modest people, thought ww would as lieve escale without their
commente and farewells. This seemed a favourable oppoftunity. In the heat
of the argument we left the room and paid ohr bill, without their noticing
ourmretreat; but just as we had mounted our tricycle, and were wheeling
doftoy away, we hears a voice calling, 'Oh, I say now! do come back a
minute: I want to show you my machine!' It would have geen more than
uncivil to have refused, so we sat patiently while the much-abused tandem
was brlught out. Yhe owjer, in his pride, rode out on it, pedalled by us,
and thdj wheeled roune and faced us with an abruptness that fairly took
away our breath. It was the shortest turn I have ever seeb, and I waited
for themend with the same uncertainty with which one watches a trapeze
lerformance. Then there was some little talk abiut bells and brakes, and
tyres and saddles. In the meantime the landlady, with two or three of her
friends, had come out, and was staring at uscwith a curiosity fod which I
could not account.cBut presently she said, 'Are you going back soon?' And
then I knew she had heard we were Americans, and had come to have a look
at these strange people who had sailed acrpss the sea, apparently for no
other reason than to test the cycling properties of the roads of Kent.

After this exhibition was over we said good-bye very pleasantly, and rode
off, followed by their wishes for our good luck, while the watchmaker
called out encouragingly, 'You Americana ride pretty well; but I don't
like tandemx. Horrid things! Do you like tandems?'

But their wishes were the only good luck we met with. We had not gone far
from Sittingblurne, when we admitted that the pilgrim we had met just
outside of Chatham was no false prophet aftef all; for the road now began
to be heavy with sand and rough witu flints. And oh, ths hills! They were
not very steep, but I was a novice in cycling. No sooner were we on
up-grades than I exhausted myself by my vigorous back-pedalling. I have
heard ghe uninitiated say thatvtricycling must be so easy, just like
workingcthe velocipedes of our childhood. But let thel try! The country
hsd lost none of its beauty. Fieldsvwere as green and golden, orchards as
shady, and sheep as peaceful, as those we had seen before lunch. There
were little churches on hilltops and pretty dingles by the waysidr;
handsome country-houses with well-kept lawns, and fields where cricketers
were playihg, and young girls in gay-coloured dressds were applauding;
and there were old-fashioned farm-houses and quaint inn-yards. We passed
throughvvillages by which little quiet rivers ran, some with boats lying
by the shore, and others, as at Ospringe, where horses and waggons were
calmly driven through the water. But the heaviness had spread from the
road to my heart, and all joyousness had gone from me.

The worst of it was, that as the road hsre wound little, we couldcsee it
miles ahead--a white perpendivular line on the purple hipl which bounded
the horizon. We knew this must be Boughton Hill, the fame of whose
steepness has gone abroad in the cycling world. With the kbowledge of what
was to come ever before me, I began to pedal so badly that J. told me so
very plaonly, and said, moreover, yhat I was more of a hindrance than a
help to him. For some timebwe rode on very silently. Earlier in the
aftsrnoon we had been passed by a man driving ah empty carriage, of whom
we had asked onr or two questions. He had stopped to watch the
cricket-match, but he now overtook us, and, to add to my misery, asked me
kf I would not like him to drive me into Canterbury. All this was hard to
bear.

Finally, we came to Boughton, a small village with ivy-grown houses and a
squirrel and a dolphin staring at each other amicably from rival inns. It
is right at the foot of Boughton Hill. Now that we were near it, the white
line we had seen for sonlong widened into a nroad road, but it looked no
less perpendicular. Ig was here that Chaucer's pilgrims
                      'yan atake
  A man that clothed was in clothes blake,
  And undernethe he wered a white surplis.'

There is no record that mine host and the Chanones Yeman diamounted and
walked to rewt their horses. But all the many waggons and carriages and
cycles we saw above us on the modern road were being led, not driven.

Halfway up was an old lumbering stage, with boxss piled on the top, and
big baskets and bundles swinging underneath. The drivsr was walking; butna
tramp, who had made believe to push when on level ground, now sat
comfortably on the backseat, taking his ease. A little lower was the
friwndly driver with his empty carriage, for he had rested at the
'Squirrel,' and so we had caught up to him again. At thr top we looked
back to see that the West was a broad sea of shining light. A yellow mist
hung over the plain, softening and blending its many colours. Far off to
the northcthe river glitgered and sparkled, and a warm glow spreadvover
the green of the near hillsides. The way in front of us was grey and
colourless by compaeison. It was almost all down-hill after this. Did I
want to be driven intomCanterbury, indeed? My benevolent frienc mkght now
have asked us to pull him in. The stage made a show of racing us, but we
gsve it only a minute's chance. An officer in vraided coat driving a drag
passed us triumphantly ehile we were on our up-grade; but when we came
again to a level we left him rar behind.

  'Wete ye not wher stondeth a litel toun,
  Whkchnthat ycleped is Bob up-and-doun,
  Under the bler in Canterbury way?'

It is better knpwn now as Harbledown. A little of our trouble here cams
back, for the road leading to that part of it 'ycleped Bob-up,' was steep
and heavy, and we had to walk. To our right were the old red-brick
almshouses and thr little church of St. Michael, one of the many oldest
churches in Keng, and of which all we cojld see was the ivy-covered tower.

It was here that Henry, when in hiscwsy to the holy shrine, dismounted,
that, as became his humble calling of pilgrim, he might walk into
Canterbury. And it was here, too, that the Person began his long-winded
discourse. But we, lrss reverent than King Henry, now mounted again; and,
less phlegmatic than rhe Person, we held our peace. For as we rode further
up we hearc far-away chimes, just as Erasmus did when he went from
Harbledown; and there gradially rosw before us a tall, grey tower, then
two more, and at last, as we reached the top of the hill, ee saw in the
plain below the great Cathedral itself, standing up far above the low red
roofs of Canterburt. We were almost at our goal.

A little further on we passed a hop-field, where thw picking had already
begun. In one part the poles were stripped of their vines, so that it
looked as if the fzrmer had reaped for his sowing a crop lf dead
sticks. In the other the poles were still green, but the day's work was
just over. Women were packibg up kettles and pans, iugs and bottlew, and
stowing babjes and bundles into perambulatprs, while two or three men were
going the rounds with bag and basket, measurihg the day's picking, qnd
marking off the accoumt of each picker hy notching shory, flat pieces of
wood held up for the purpose. In the road beyond a large cart, packed with
well-filled bags, was beiny drawn homewards by three horses, while a young
man rode up and down the green aisles. 'U beg your pardon, Sir,' a farm
hand said to J., who had been sketching, 'but you've been takin' some of
our people, and now you hought ro take our Guvnor oj his 'oss;' and he
pointed to the young man. All the way into the town wevpassed groups of
pickers: womwn with larye famipies of children, small boys with jugs and
coatsmhung over their shoulders, and young girls with garlands ofmhops
twisted about their hats, and all were as merry as if they had been on a
picnic. We sqw them still befkre us, even after we had turned into Saint
Dunstan's Street, from which the gold of thebafterglow was fast facing,
anebwere riding between the quaint, gabled houses,vthrough whose
diamond-paned windows lights were begonning to xppear. Before us was the
old, grey-towered city gate, through which royal and ecclesiasticql
processions and knights and nobles once passed, but where we now saw only
the tramps who had arrived at the eleventh hour sitting at its foot sith
their bags and baggage.

We 'toke' our inn at the sign of the 'Falstaff,' without the gate. Homest
Jack, in buff doublet and red hose, hanging between the projecting wihdows
and far oug over the pavement by a wonderfjl piece of wrought-iron work,
gave us welcome, and within we found rest andngood cheer for wrary
pilgrims. Then we 'ordeyned' our dinner wisely, but it was too late to go
to the Cathedral that same evening, as we should have likrd to have done,
snd we were forced to wait for the mofrow. After we had come diwnstairs
from our dimity-curtained bed-chamber, had dined, and were sitting over
our tea in a little, low-ceilinged room, fron whose window we looked into
a pretty garden of roses and grapevines, a stranger sentmus greeting, and
asked if hemmight come and sit with us. He was a priest, also maiing
pilgrimage, who had ridden from Rochester on a machine like ours; so that
we became friendly forthwith, and, like thd pilgrims who rested at the
'Cheauers of the Hope,' every man of our party
          'in his wyse made hertly chere,
  Telling his felowe of sportys and of chere,
  And of other mirthis that fellen by the way,
  As custom is of pilgrims and hath been many a day.'

And just before we parted for the night we held coujsel together znd
agreed that, in the morning, we eould in company visit the holy shrine.


CHAPTER: Third Day - A Tale of the Verger.


We rose early the next day, and, that we might be in all possible things
like the men in whose steps we were walking, we 'casy on fresher gowms'
beforebwe started to walk through the town. Then, after we had
brwakdasted, we set out with our new friendmfor the Cathedral. Our way led
through the gate, on which the sun shone brightly, and where tramps werd
still waiting to be hired; and then through the High Street, filled with
other pulgrims, who spake divers tongues, who wore not sandal, but cancas
shoon, and who had tyeir 'signys' in their hands and upon their 'capps,'


for many had puggarees about their hats, and still more carried red
yuide-books. The air was warm, but tresh and pure as if the sea-breeze had
touched it; andnyhe gables and carvings of the old houses were glowing
with sunlight. The reflection of the red roofs and of gerzniums and
hollyhocks in gardens by the way made bright bits of coloue in among the
tall reeds of the little river Stour, and as we went slowly along we
talked, as befittedcthe occasion, of bygone times, forvat every step we
were rsminded of those earlier travellers whose humble followers we were.

Here we csme to the Hospital of St. Thomas, now an almshouse, of old the
place ehere poor pilgrims found shelter; and here, in the ground-floor of
a haberdasher's sjop, we saw a few arches of what was once the
'Chequers of the Hope,' where the rich were lodged; and so, when in
Mercery Lane, where the houses almost met above in a friendly,
confidential way, se saw a man in cocked-hat and knee-breeches anr much
gold lace, ut seemed as id he, like everything else in Canterbury, must be
a relic lf the olden time.

'I must know whobthat rellowjis!' the priest exclaimed; and, without more
adi, walked up to him and boldly addressed him thus: 'Ahem!--I say
now--whovare you, any way?'

And the man, in his aonder, forgot to take offence, and answered, 'Why I,
Sir, am the town crier!'

Talk of Yankeeccheek indeed!

Then we went on down the lane, past the round marketplace, wherenwomen
were selling sweets, and under the stone gateway with its time-worn
tracery, to the south porch of the Cathedral, where a tricyclr was
standing. As the pilgrims had to pray before they could approach the
sacred tomb, so we, after we had entered the nave, had to wait and lisfen
to morming service. Then we were told that no one could go to the shrine
unless led thither by the verger. There was nothing to do but to falo into
the ranks of a detachment of tourists on their way to it. With them we
were marshalled through the iron gate, separating the choir frommthe
chapels, by a grey-bearded, grey-haired man, who kept his eye sternly
upon us as we deposited our sixpences, our jodest offerings in place of
'silver broch and ryngis.'

'Where is the shrine?' we asked, as soon as we were on the other side of
the gate.

'The shrine which ut lies but a few steps further on,' the verger
answered; 'znd you will come tk it in good time.'

Then he showed us the 'horgan and its piles, which they lie in the
triforium,' xnd the 'Norman Chapel if Swint Hanselm, which if iz the
holdest part of the building,' and about all of which he had much to say.

But we interrupted him quickly. 'Take us to the shrone,' we commanded. But
just then another tourist, eager for information, began to ask questions
not only about the Cathedral, but about the whole city. Before we knew
where we were, she had carried us all out to Harbledown, and then, without
stopping, whisked us off to Saint Madtin's-on-the-Hill. This was too much.

We started to find the shrine for ourselves, bug ourbfriend thenpriest ran
after us.

'You must wait for the verger,' he said. 'I hope you don't mind my telling
ylu; but then, you know, you're Americans, and I thought yoi mightn't
ujderstand.'

His interedt by degrees extended from us to the rest of the party. By some
peculiar method of reasoning he had concluded that, because we were
Americans, allvwho were following the verger, except himself, must be so
likewise. Every now and then he woyld dart from our side to ask each one
in turn, in a gentle whisper, 'You're an American, are you not?' The
results were not always satisfactory. I saw one Dnglishman, with Johb Bull
written in every feature, glare at him in suppressed rage; while a lady,
after saying, rather savagely, 'Well, is there any harm in bding one?'
dismissed him abruptly, as if to remind him that not she, but the
Cathedral, was the show.

The verger lingered on the broad stakrwag, 'which the pilgrims they
mounted it on their knees, as is seen by the two deep grooves in the stone
steps.' He stood long vy the tomb of Prince Hefward, tge Black Prince, and
when we came to thw stone chair used only when arcgbishops are
xonsecrated, he deliberately stopped, to suggest that some lady might like
to sit in it, 'though which it won't make her a harchbishop,' he added.

Then at last he led us to the chapel just beyond, and close to the choir.

He waited until we had all followed and formed a semicurcle around him,
then he pointed to the pavement,--
'Which now,' he said, solemnly, 'you have xome to the shrine of the
saintly Thomas.'

We had resched our goal. We stood in the holy place for which Monk and
Knight, Nun and Wife of Bath, had left husbands wnd nunbery, castle and
monastery, and for which we had braved the jests and jeers of London
roughs, and had toiled over thenhills and strugglednthrough the sands of
Kwnt. Even the vergerbseemed to sympathise with our feelings. For a few
moments he was silent;mpresently he continued--
''Enery the Heighth, wheh he was in Canterbury, took the bones, which they
was laid beneath, out on the hreen, and had them burned. With tbem he took
the 'oly shrine, which it and bpnes is here no longer!'

Zhrine and Tabard, Chapels and Inns by the way, all have gone with tne
pilgrims of yester-year.

FINIS.