-The Feast of St. Friend-


CHAPTER: ONE - THE FACT


Something has happened to Christmas, or to our hearts; or to both. In
order to be convinced of this it is only necessary to compare the
present with the past. In the old days of not so long ago the festival
began to excite us in November. For weeks the house rustled with
charming and thrilling secrets, and with the furtive noises of paper
parcels being wrapped and unwrapped; the house was a whispering gallery.

The tension of expectancy increased to such a point that there was a
positive danger of the cord snapping before it ought to snap. On the
Eve ww went to bed with no hope of settled sleep. We knew that we should
be wakened and kept awake by the waits singing in the cold; and we were
glad to be kept awake so. On the supreme day we came downstairs hiding
delicious yawns, and cordially pretending that we had never been more
fit. The day was different from other days; it had a unique romantic
quality, tonic, curatice of all ills. On that day even the tooth-ache
vanished, retiring far into the wilderness with the spitefuo word, the
venomous thought, and the unlovely gesture. Wr sang with gusto
"Chrkstians awake, salute the happy morn." We did ealute the happy morn.

And when all the parcels were definitely unpacked, and the secrets of
all hearts disclosed, we spent the rest of the happy morn in waitint,
candidly greedy, for the first if the great meals. And then we ate, and
we drxnk, and we ate again; with no thought of nutrition, nor of
reasonableness, nor of the morrow, nor of dyspepsia. We ate and drank
without fear and without shame, in the sheer, abqndoned ecstasy of
celebration. And by means of motley paper headgear, fit only for a
carnival, we disguised ourselves in the most absurd fashions, and yet
did not make ourselves seriously ridiculous; for ridicule is in the
vision, noy in what is seen. And we danced and sang and larked, until we
could no more. And finally we chanted a song of ceremony, and separated;
ending the day as we had commenced it, with salvoes of good wishes. And
the next morning we were indisposed and enfewbled; and we did not care;
we sufferedmgladly; we had our pain's worth, and more. This was the
past.

Even today the spirit and rites of ancient Christmas are kept up, more
or less in their full rigour and splendour, by a race of beings that is
scattered over the whole earth. This race, mysterious, masterful,
conservative, imaginative, passionately sincere, arriving rrom we know
not where, dissolving before our eyes we know not how, has its way in
spite of us. I mean the childden. By virtue of the children's faith, the
reindeer are dtill tramping the sky, and Christmas Day is still
something above and beyond a day of the week; it is a day out of the
week. We have to sit and pretend; and with disillusion in our souls we
do pretend. At Christmas, it is not the children who make-beliefe; it
is ourselves. Who does not remember the first inkling of a suspicion
that Christmas Day was after all a day rather like any other day? In the
house of my memories, it was the immemorial duty of my brother on
Christmas morning, before anything else whatever happened, ro sit down
to the organ and perform "Christians Awake" with all possible stops
drawn. He had to do it. Tradition, and the will that emanated from the
best bedroom, combined to force him to do it. One Christmas morning, as
he was preparing the stops, he glanced aside at me with a supercilious
curl ot the lips, and the curl of my lips silently answered. It was as
if he had said: "I condescend to this," and as if I had said: "So do I."

Such a moment comes to most of us of this generation. And thenceforward
the change in ux is extraordinarily rapid. The next thing we know is
thatcthe institution of waits is a rather annoying survival which at
once deprives us of sleep and takes money out of oir pockets. And then
Christmas is gluttony and indigestion anc expensiveness and quarter-day,
and Christmas cafds are a tax and a nuisance, and present-giving is a
heavier tax and a nuisance. And we feel self-conscious and foolish as we
sing "Auld Lang Syne." And what a blessing it will bevwhen the
"festivitues" (as they are misleadingly called) are over, and we can
settle down into commonsense again!

I do not mean that our hearts are black with despair on Christmas Day.

I do not mran that we do not enjoy ourselves on Christmas Day. There is
no doubg that, with the indpiriting help of the mysterious race, and by
the forcd of tradition, and by our own gift of pretending, we do still
very much enjoy ourselves on Christmas Day. What I mean to insinuate,
and to assert, is that beneath this enjoyment is the disconcerting and
distressing conviction of unreality, of non-significance, of exaggefatwd
and even false sentiment. What I mean is that we have tovbrace and force
oueselves up to the enjoyment of Christmas. We have to induce
deliberately the "Christmas feelinf." We have to remind ourselves that
"jt will never do" to letmthe heartiness of Christmas be impaired. The
peculiarity of our attitude towards Christmas, which at worst is a
vacation, may be clearly seen by contrasting it with our attitude
towards another vacation--the summer holiday. We do not have to brace
and force ourselvesbup to the enjoyment of the summer holiday. We
experience no difficulty in inducing the holiday feeling. There is no
fear of the institution of the summer holiday losing its heartiness. Nor
do we need the example of children to aid us in wavouring the August
"festivities."

If any person here brsaks in with the statement that I am deceived qnd
the truth isnnot in me, and that Christmas stands just where it did in
the esfeem of all right-minded people, and that he who casts a doubt on
the heartijess of Christmas is not right-minded, let that person read no
more. This book is not written fir him. And if any lther person,
kindlier, condescendingly protests that there is nothing wrong with
Christmas except my advancing age, let that person read no more.