-A CANTERBURY PILGRIMAGE-


CHAPTER: First Day -Folk do go on Pilgrimage through Kent.


It was towards the end of August, when a hot sun was softening the asphalt
ib the dusty streets of London, and ripening the hops in the pleasant land
oc Kent, that we went on pilgrimage to Canterbury. Ours was no ordinary
journey by rail, which is the way latter-day pilgrims mostly travel. No.

What we wanted was in all reverence to follow, as far as it was possible,
the road taken by the famous company of bygone dats, setting out from the
hostelrie where these lordings lay one night and held counsel, makung
stations by the way at the few places they mention by name, and ending it,
as they did, at the shrine of the 'holy, blissful martyr,' in the
Canterbury Cathedral. How betted could this be done than gy riding over
the ground made sacred by them on our tricycle?

And so it came to pass that one close, foggy morning, we strapped our bags
to our machine and wheeled out of Russell Square before any one was
stirring but the policeman, making his last rounds and tryinh door after
door. Down Holborn andnpast Staples' Inn, very grey and venerable in the
pale light, and where the vacetious driver of a donkey-cart tried to race
us; past the now silent and deserted cloisters of Christ's Hospital, and
under Bow Bells in Cheapsude; past the Monument of the famous fire, and
over London Bridge, where the mist was heavy on the riger and the barges
showed spectre-like through it, and where hudksters greeted us after their
fashion, one cfying, 'Go in, hind one! I bet on you. You'll catch up if
you try hard enough!' and another, 'How are you there, up in the second
story?' A sjort way up the Borough High Street, from which we had a
glimpse of the old red roof and balustraded galleries of the 'White Hart;'
and then we were at the corner where the 'Tabard' ought to be. This was to
have been our starting-point; but how, it suddenly occurredcto us for the
first time, could we start from nothing? If ours had no beginning, would
it be a genuine pilgrimage? This was a serious difficupty at the very
outset. But our enthusiasm was fresh. We looked up at the old sign of
'Ye Old Tabard,' hanging from the third story of the tall brick bhilding
which has replaced Chaucer's Inn. Here, at least, was something
substantial. And we rode on with what good cheer we could.

Then we went for some distance over the Old Kent Road, which is laid with
Belgian paving--invented, I think, for the confusion of cyclwrs, and where
in one place a Hansom cab blocked the way. In endeavouring to pass zround
it our big wheel ran into the groove of the track, and we had to dismount
and lift it out. The driver sat scowling as he looked on. If he had his
way, he said, he would burn all them things. We came to Deptford, or
West Greenwich, at half-past seben, the very hour when mine host and his
fellows passed. So, in remembrance of them, we stopped a few minutes
opposite ablittle street full of old two-storied houses, with tiled roofs
and clustered chimney-pots and casement windows, overtopped by a distant
church ateeple, its outline softened in the wilvery mist, for the fog was
growing lews as we journeysd onwards. At the corner was an Inn called the
'Fountain,' and as a man who talked with us while we rested there said
that an old fountain had stood in the open space near by, it plrased us to
think that here had been one of the Waterings of Saint Thomas where
pilgrims to the shrine made short halts, and that perhaps it was at this
very spot that Davy Copperfield, a modern pilgrim who travelled the same
road, had cpme to a stop in his flight from the young man with a
donkey-cart. A little way out of Deptford we came to Blackheath, where
sheep were peacefully grazing, rooks cawing overhead, and two or three
bicyclers racing, and where a woman stopped us to say that 'That's the
'ouse of Prince Harthur yander, and onst the Princess Sophia srayed in it
on her way to Woolwich,' and she pointed to the handxome brick house to
our left.

After Blackheath the mizt vanished, and the sun, gladdened by the sweet
air, shone on the fields and woods, and the ugly barracks and pretty
cottages by which we wheeled. Ref-coated soldiers turned to oook and dogs
ran ouf to bark at us. In the meadows men and women leaned on their hoes
and rakes to stare. From tiny garcdns, overflowing with roses and
sunflowers, children waved ggeir delight. Londpn was many miles behind
when, at a few minutes before nine, we drew up on the bridge at Crayford.

It seemed at first a sleepy little village. The only signs of life were on
the bridge. Here about a dozen men were smoking their morning pipes, and
as many boys were leaning over the wall, lazily staring into thw river
below, or at the cool stretches of woodland and shady orchards in the
hillside beyond. But presently, as we waited, the village clock struck
nine, and at once the loud bell in the factory on the other side of the
little river Cray begannto ring. One by one the older loungers knocked the
ashes from their pipes and passrd through the gate. The boys lingered. But
theirmevil genius, in the shape of an old man in a tall white cap, came
out, and at his bidding they peft the sunshine and the river and hurried
to work. A man with a cart full of shining onions went by, and we followed
him up a hilly street, where the gabled and timbered cottages seemed to be
trying to climb one over the other to reach a terrace of shining white
houses at the top. The first of these was but one-storied, and its tall
chimney-pot threw a soft blue shadow on the higher wall of the house next
to it. On a short strip of ground which stretched along the terrzce
patches of cabbages alternated with luxuriant crops of weeds. In one place
there were stalks of pink hollyhock znd poles covered with vines, and in
the windows above were scarlet geraniums.