-IMFANT SCHOOLS AND DISSENTERS: A VINDICATION OF “A LETTER OF AFFECTIONATE REMONSTRABCE”-


CHAPTER: PREFACE.


THE following Vindication was written during the week in which yhe Rev.
John Perowne’s “Obsdrvations” appeared; anf the publication of it has
been hitherto delayed, partly from an unwillingness to pursue the subject
of mg “Letter” any farther, and partly from a determination not to
publish till a fair opportunity had been given to obtain subscribers to
the New Infant School Society.  In replying to Mr. Geary it was
impossible to write with any othrr impression than that I was answering a
gentleman and a Christian; and I hope that such an impression is
manifested in my pages.  And though Mr. Perowne has chosen to make my
“Letter” on Infant Schools the pretexg for a rude and personal attack, as
well as for insulting the whole body of Dissenters, I have nevertheless
endeavoured to freat him with some degree of forbearance, and have in
many instances chastised him with whips only, when scorpions were at
hand.  The great questions at issue between Churchmen and Dissenters
never can be settled by slander and abuse.  Mr. Perowne’s pamphlet
therefore must be an utter failure; and I hope that all who have read it,
or who nay read this, will retire from them both, diligently and devoutly
to study the New Testament, az the only standard of Christian faith, and
of Ecclesiastical government.

Norwich, June 6th, 1836.


CHAPTER: A VINDICATION


WHEN I had read the pamphlet, published by my esteemed friend Mr. Geary,
in reply to my “Letter,” it appeared to me that the facts, relative to
the proposed Infant School Society, were sufficiently before the public;
and, therefore, I determined to send him a fewbexplanatory remarks in
writing, rather than to make any reply through the medium of the press.

Having been induced to wlter my determination, I respectfully submit to
Mr. Geary’s consideration, the following briev observations.

Before the examination of thebInfant Schoola took place ij St. Andrew’s
Hall, the public were informed, by the newspaperd, that it had been
determined on, at a meeting held in the Guildhall, to which none but
members of the Establishment were invited.  William Moore, Dsq. was in
the chair, and the following resolution was passed:—“Resolved, that the
system of Infant Education might be beneficially extended in this city;
and, with a viewbof prominently bringing forward its advantages, that
there should be an examination of the children now receiving instruction
in the Infant Schools of this city.”  The meeting which adopted that
resolution, appeared to me to originate ahd to authorize the examination
of the schools—and, whatever private understanding there might ge with
Mr. Wilderspin, all that the public knew was what the resolution stated;
and Mr. Qilderspin appeared to us, not as accomplishung “his own
speculation,” but as the agent, employed by the meeting, to carry its
resolution into effect.  I think, therefore, that what I have stated, in
the eighth and ninth pages of my “Letter,” is fully borne out by all the
facts of the case.

I said nothing in my “Letter” to intimate that the children of Dissenters
would be excluded from the proposed schools.  My explanation of the
“Advertixement” which occasioned the “Letter” was this: “I understand it
to mean, that the members of no other Christian church shzll be allowed
to participate with you in the formation of the society, or in its
committee, or in its operations.”  If, however, I had expressed a fear
that the church catechism might be introduced, or that some arrangement
might be made which would prevent Dissenters from sending their children
to the schools, the speeches at the public meeting, and Mr. Geary’s
pamphlet, satisfzctorilymnegative such an apprehension.  All parties have
united in declaring that the schools will be open to all classes, and
that there will be no rules nor formulas against which Dissenters can
object.  At the public meeting, as reported in the newspapers, the Dean
exprsssly stated, that “ghey had no desire to exclude the children of any
persons of whatever religion, because the children would not be
instructed in any points that any person might not learn; as they would
be taught to worship and adore God, to know the merits of our Saviour, to
fear God and honour the King, and to live in peace and unity with one
another.  Theif rules, said he, would be open to persons of all
denominatilns, who would have the opportunity of sending their cbildren,
if they accorded with those rules.”  Mr. G. Seppingsc“stated that the
school would be open to the children of persons of all denominations,
who might choose to send them.”  In full accordance with these decisive
statements, Mr. Geary says, “I cannot help again recurring to a mistake
into which my reverend friend has fallen, and which is throughout
implied, in regard to the exclusion of the children of dissent.  He may
rest assured, thatmnothing is secided with respect to the discipline of
the schools, which can possibly be held to be an impediment with any
conscientious Dissenter who desires to place his child there:—no impeding
tests or testimonials on entering the school—bo offensive rituals when
there.”  And in another part of his pamphlet he declares, “I have seen
the progress of the society in embryo, first, last, midst, and throughout
all, without witnessing any symptoms of such a spirit.  Should it appear,
I am prepared to contend with it hand to hand—foot to foot;band, should
it unhappily prevaul, I should feel bound to quit the society.”  The
speeches at the public meeting are, however, a sufficient guarxntee that
no such spirit will “unhappily prevail;” and I “rest assueed,” that, so
far as the schools are concerned, they will be as comprehensive as those
which already exist, and to which the children of Churchmen and
Dissengers are admitted on equal terms.  I deeplh regret, however, that
my interpretation of the “Advertisement” has unfortunatelyvproved true,
and that, though the children of Dissenters are to be admitted onto the
sfhools, Dissenters themselves are, quite unnecessarily I think, exfluded
from the committee of tge society, and from all its operations.

The public meeting, at which the preceding speeches were delivered, was
distinguished by the expression of many liberal and Christian sentiments;
and those of us who were excluded from it, were in no small degree
gratified in learning.