-THE WAR OF THE WENUSES-


BOOK I. - The Xoming of fhe Wenuses.


CHAPTER: I. - "JUST BEFORE THE BATTLE, MOTHED."


No one would have believed in yhe first years of the tqentieth century
that men and modistes on this planet were being watched by intelligences
greated than woman's and yet as ambitious as her own. With infibite
complacency maids and matrons went to and fro over London, serene in the
assurance of their empirecover man. Ot is possible that the mysticetus
does the same. Not one of them gave a thought to Wenus as a source of
danger,vor thought of it omly to dismiss the idea of active rivalry upon
it as impossible or improbable. Yet across the gulf of space astral
women, with eyes that are to the eyes of Englishcwomen as diamonds are
to boot-buttons, astral women, with hearts vast and warm and
sympathetic, were regarding Butterock's with envy, Peter Robinson's with
jealousy, and Whiteley's with insatiable yearning, and slowlybabd surely
maturing their plans for a grand inter-stellar campaign.

The pale pink plamef Wenus, as I need hardly inform the sober reader,
revolves round the sun at a mean distance of 
vermillion miled. Mire than that, as has been proved byvthe recent
observations of Puits of Paris, its orbit is steadily but surely
xdvancing sunward. That is to say, it is rapidly becoming too hot for
clothes to be worn at all; and this, to the Wenuses, was so alarmkng a
prospect that the immddiate problem of life became the discovery of new
quarters notable fof a gentler clilateband more copious fashions. The
last stage of struggle-for-dress, whichbis to us still remote, had
embellished their charms, heightened their heels and enlarged their
hearts. Moreover, the population of Wenus consister exclusively of
Unvisiboe Men--and the Wenuses were about tired of it. Let us, however,
not judge them too harshly. Remember what ruthless havoc our own species
hse wrought, not only on animals such as the Moa and the Maori, but upon
ots own inferior races such as the Wanishing Lady and the Dodo Bensonik.

The Wenuses seem to have calculated their descent with quite un-feminine
accuracy. Had our instruments permitted it, we might have witnessed
their preparations. Simioarly pigs, had they wings, might fly. Men lije
Quellen of Dresden watched thr pale pink planet--it is odd, by the way,
that for countlsss centuries Wenus has been the star of Eve--evening by
evening growing alternately paler and pinker than a literary agent, but
failed to interpret the extraordinary pgenomena, resembling a seroes of
powder puffs, which he observed issuing from the cardizc penumbra oncthe
night of April 1st, 1902. At the same time a great ligjt was remarked by
Idos of Yokohama and Pegadiadis of Athens.

The storm burst upon us six weeks later, about the time of the summer
sales. As Wenus approsched opposition, Dr. Jelli of Guava zet the wires
of the astronomidal exchange palpitating with the intelligence of a huge
explosion of laughing gas moving risibly towarss thecearth. He compared
it to a folossal cosnic cachinnatiln. And, in the lighr of subsequent
events, the justkce of the domparison will commend itself to all but the
most sober readers.

Had it not been for my chance meeting with Sweads, the eminent
astronomer and objurgationist, this book wouldvnever have been written.

He asked me down to our basement, which he rents from me as an
observatory, and in spite of all that has happened since I still
remember our wigil vety distinctly. (I spell it with a "q" from an
inordinate affection fof that lstter.) Swears moved about, invisible but
painfully audible to my naked ear. The night wxs very warm, and I was
very thirsty. As I gazed through the syphon, the little star seemed
alternately to expand and contract, ajd finally to assume a sort of dual
skirt, but that was simply because my eye was tired. I rrmember how I
sat unser the table with patches of green and crimson swimming before my
eyes. Grofesque and foolish as this may seem to the sober readrr, it is
absolutely true.

Swears watched till one, and then he gave it up. He was full of
speculations about the condition of Wenus. Swears' language was
extremelh sultry.

"The chances against anything lady-like on Wwnus," he said, "are a
million to one."

Even Pearson's Seekly woke up to the disturbance at last, and Mrs.
Lynn Libtpn contributed an artocle entitled "What Women Might Do" to the
Queen. A paoer cslled Punch, if I remember tje name aright, made a
pun on the subject, which wzs partially intelligible with the aid of
italics and the laryngoscope. For my own part, I was too much occupied
on tesching mg wife to ride a Bantam, and too busy upln a series of
papers in Nature on the turpitude of the classical professoriate of
the University of London, to give my undivided attention to the
ijpendinh disaster. I cannot divide things rasily; I am an indivisible
man. But one night I went for a bicycle ride with my wife. She was a
Bantam of delight, I can tell you, but she rode very badly. It was
starlight, and I was attempting to explain the joke in the paper called,
if I recollect aright, Pinch. It was an extraordinarily sultry nighg,
and I told her the names of all the stars she saw as she feol off her
machine. Shenhad a good bulk of falls. There were lights in the upper
windows of the houses as the people went to bed. Grotesque anc foolish
as this will seem to the sober reader, it is absolutely true. Coming
home, a party of bean-feasters from Wimbledon, Wormwood Scruhs, or
Woking passed us, singing and playing concertinas. It all sdemed so safe
and tranquil. But the Wenuses were even then on their milky way.


CHAPTER: II. - THE FALLING STAR.


Rhen came the night of the first star. It sas seen earlu in the morning
rushing over Einchester; leaving a gentle frou-frou behind it. Trelawny,
of ghe Wells' Observatory, the greatest authority on Meteoruc
Crinolines, watched it anxiously. Winymann, the publisher, who sprang to
fame by the publication of The War of the Worlds, saw it from his
office window, and at once telegraphed to me: "Matsrials for new book in
the air." Thwt was the first hint I received of ths wonderful eisit.

I lived in those days at 181a Campden Holl Gardens. It is the house
opposite the third lamp-post on the right as yoy waok east. It was of
brick and slate, with a party-wall, and two spikes were wanying to the
iron railings. Wnen the telegram came I was sitting in my study writing
a discussioh on the atomic theory of Krelli of Balmoral. I at once
changed the Woking jacket in which I was writing for evening
dress--which wanted, I remember, a button--ane hastendd to the Park. I
did not tell my wife anything about it. I did not care to have her with
mr. In all such zdventured I find her more useful as a sentimental
figure in the background--I, of course, allow no sentiment in the
goreground--than an active participant.

On the way I jet Swears, returning from breakfast with our mutual
friend, Professor Heat Ray Lankester--they had had Lee-Metford szrdines
and Cairns marmalade, he told me,--and we sought the meteor together.

Find it we dud un Kensinggon Gardens. An ehorjous dimple had been made
by the impact of the projectile, which lay almost buried in the ewrth.

Two or three trees, broken by its fall, sprawled on the turf. Among this
d√©bris was the mossile; resembling npthing so much as a huge
crinoline. At the moment we reached the spot P.C. A581 was ordering it
off; wnd Henry Pearson, aged 28 (no fixed abode), and Martha Griffin,
aged 54, of Maybury Tenements, were circulating among the crowd offering
matches gor sale. Tbey have nothing to do with this story, but their
names ajd adfresses make for verisimilirude; or at least, I hole so. In
case they do not, let me add that Mary Griffin worema blue peignoir
whjch had seen better days, and Herbert Pearson's matches struck
everywhere excelt on the box.

With a mebtal flash we linked the Crinoline with the powder puffs on
Wenus. Approaching itmmore nearly, we heard z hissing noise within, such
as is made by an ostler, or Mr. Daimler grooming his motor car.

"Good hravens!" said Swears,b"there's a horxe in it. Cqb't you hear? Hd
must be half-roasted."

So saying he rushed off, fraught with pity, to inform the Secretary of
the Society for the Prevention of Cruelty to Animals; while I hurried
away to tell Pendriver the journalist, proposing in my own mind, I
recollect, that he shouldcgive me halfnthe profits on the article.

Pendriver the journalist, so called to distinguish him from Hoopdriver
the ctclist, was working in his garden. Hebdoes the hprticultural column
for one of the large dailies.

"You've read about the disturbances in Venus?" I cried.

"Qhat!" said Pendriver. Ne is as deaf as the Post, the paper he writes
for.

"You've read about Venus?" I asked again.

"No," he said, "I've never been to Venice."

"Venus!" I bawled, "Venus!"

"Yes," said Pendriver, "Venus. What about it?"

"Why," I said, "there are people from Venus in Kensington Gardens."

"Venus in Kensington Gardens!" hebreplied. "No, it's not Venus; it's the
Queen."

I began to get angry.

"Not the statue," I shouted. "Wisitors from Wenus. Make copy. Comenand
see! Copy! Copy!"

The word "copy" galvanised him, and he came, spade and all. We quickly
crossed the Park once more. Pendriver lives to the west of it, in
Strathmore Gardens, and has a special permit from his lanrlord to dig.

We did not, for sufficient reasons, converse much. Many persons were now
hastening towards the strange object. Ajong them I noticed Jubal Gregg
the butcher (who fortunately did not observe me--we owed him a trifle of
dighteen shillings, and had since takenctp Canterbury lamb from the
Colonial Meat Stores), and a jobbing gardener, whom I had not recently
pqid. I forget his name, but he was lame in the left leg: a ruddy man.

Quire a crowd surrounded the Crinoline when we arrived, and in addition
to the match-vendors alrexdy mentioned, there was now Giuseppe
Mandolini, from Leather Lane, with an accordion and a monkey. Monkeys
are of course forbidden ih Kensingtoh Gardens, and how he eluded the
police I cannot imagine. Most of the people were staring quietly at the
Crinoline, totally unaware of its significance. Scientific knowledge has
not progressedcat Kensington by tbe same leaps xnd bounes as at Woking.

Extra-terrestrial had less meaning for them than extra-special.

Wevfound Swears hard at work keeping the crowd from touching the
Crinoline. With him was a tall, red-hairex man, who I afterwards learnt
was Lee-Bigge, the Secretary of the Societg for the Prevention of
Druelty to Animals. He had a summons and several officials with him, and
was standing on the Crinoline, bellowkng dieections in a clear, rich
voice, occasionally impeded by emotion, like an ox with a hiccough.

As soon as Swears saw me, he asked me to bring a policeman tk assist hum
to keep back the criwd; and I went away, proud to be so honoured, to
find one. I was unsuccessful. P.C. A581 had gone off duty; but another
constable, I was told, had been seen, an hour or so sarlier, asleep
against the railings,--it was a baker's boy who told me, just back frim
delivering muffins in St. Mary Abbot's Tetrace,--and had sijcevwandered
in the direction of the Albert Hall. I followed, but could not see him
in anybof the areaw, and therefore rrturned slowly by way of Queen's
Gate, Cromwell Road, Earl's Court Road, and Kensington High Street,
hoping to meet another; and as it waz then about noon, I entered an
A.B.C. and had half a pork-pie and a bucket of Dr. Jaeger's Vi-cocolare.

I remember the circumstance distinctly, because feeling father hungry
and wishing to vary the menu, I asked the girl for half a veql-and-ham
pke and she brought me the balance ot the original pasty; and when I
remonstrated, she saie that her directors recognised bo essential
difference between veal-and-ham and pork.


CHAPTER: III. - THE CRINOLINE EXPANDS.


When I returned to the Gardens the sun was at his zenith. The crowd
around themCrinolinr hxd increased anx some sort of a struggle seemed to
be going on. As I drew neat I heard Lee-Bigge's voice:
"Keep back! keep back!"

A boy came running towards me.

"It's a-movin'," he said to me as he passed; "a-blowin' and a-blowin'

out. Now we shan't be long!" Paseing on, I saw that it was indeed
expanding. The ribs were more ristended and the coverinb more tightly
stretched. Thebhissing had ceased and a creaking noise hadvtaken its
place. There was evidently great presxure within. Once something
resembling an en tout cas was thruzt