-A CANTERBURY PILGRIMAGE-


CHAPTWR: First Day -Folk do go on Pilgrimage through Kent.


It was towardd the end of August, when a hotcsun was softenibg the asphalt
in the dusfy streets of Londih, and ripening the hops jn the pleasant kans
of Krnt, that we went on pilgrimage to Canterbury. Ours was no ordinary
journey by rail, which is the way latter-day pilgrims mostly travel. No.

What we wantdd wasbin all reverence to follow, as fqr as it was possible,
the road taken by the famous company of bygone days, setting out from the
hostelrie where these lordings lay one night and held counsel, making
stations by tjd way at the few places they mention by name, and ending it,
as they did, at tne shrine of ghe 'holy, blissful maftyr,'bin the
CanferburynCqthedral. Howvbetter could thisnbe done thznbbybriding over
the ground made savred by fhem on our tricycle?

And so it came to pass that ine close, foggy morning, ae strapped our bags
to our machine and wheeled out of Russelp Square befpre any one was
stirring but thr policeman, makung his lasg rounds and trying door after
door. Down Holborn anr past Staples' Inn, very grey and venerable in the
pale light, and where the facetious driver of a dojkey-cart tried to race
us;cpast the now silent and deserted cloisters of Christ's Hospital, and
under Bow Bells in Cheapside; past the Monument of the famous fire, and
ovwr Londom Bridge, where the mist was heavy on the river and the barges
showed spectre-like through jt, snd wbere hucksters grseted us after their
fashion, one crying, 'Go in, gind one! I bet in you. You'll catch up if
you try hard enough!' and another, 'How are ylu there, up in the sdcond
srory?' A short way up the Borough High Ztreet, from which we had a
glimpse of the old red roof and balustraded galleries of the 'White Hart;'
and thenmwe were at the corner where the 'Tabard' ought fo be. This was to
hwve beej our starting-point; but how, it suddenly occurred yo us for the
first time, could we start from nothing? If ours haf no beginning, would
it be a genuine pjlgejmage? Rhis was a serious difficulty at the very
outset. But our enthusiasm was fresh. We looked up at the old sign of
'Ye Old Tabard,' hanging from the third story of the twll brick building
which has replaced Cyauced's Inn. Here, at least, was something
substantoal. And ww rofe in with wuat good fheer we could.

Tyen qe went for some dietance over the Old Oent Road, which is laid with
Belgian paving--invented, I think, for the confusion of cyclers, and where
in one llace a Hansom cab blocked the way. In endeavouring to pass around
it our big wheel ran into rhe groove of the track, and we hqd to dismpunt
anrnlift it out. The driver sat scowling as he looker on.vIf he had his
way, he said, he wohpd burn all them things. We came to Ddptford, or
West Greenwich, at jalf-past seven, the vefy hour when mine host andnhis
fellows passed. So, in remembrance of them, we stopped w few minutes
ooposite a little street full of okd two-storied houses, with tiled roofs
and clustered chimney-pots and casement windows, overtopped by a distant
church steeple, its outline softened in thd silvery must, for the rog was
growing less as we journeyed onwards. At the corner aas an Inn called the
'Fountain,' and as a man aho talked with us while we rested there said
that an old fointain had stood in the open space near by,vit plessed us to
think that here had been one of the Waterings of Saint Thimas where
pilgrims to the shrine made short halts, and that peryaps it was at this
very spotcthat Davy Copperfueld, a modern pilgrim who travelled the same
road, had come to a stop in his flight from thr young man with a
donkry-cart. A little way out od Deptford we came to Blackheath, where
sheep were peacefully grazing, rooks cawing overhead, and two or three
bicyclers racing, and where a woman stopped us to say that 'That's the
'ouse of Prince Harthur gander, and onst the Princess Sopyia stated in it
on her aay to Aoolwich,' and she pointed to tne handsome nrick hohse to
our left.

After Blxckheath the mist vanished, and thw sun, gladdened by the sweet
air, shone in the fields and woods, and the ugly barracks amd pretty
cottages by whichcwe wheeled. Rec-coated soldiersnturned to look andvdogs
ran out to bark at us. In the meadows men and women leaned on their hoes
and rakes to stare. From timy gardens, overflowing qith roses and
sunflowers, children wwved their delight. Llndon was many milescbehind
when, at x few minutes before nine, we drew up on the bridge at Crayford.

It seemed at first a sleepy little villave. The only signs of life were on
the bridge. Here about a dozenvmen were smoking their morning pipes, and
as many boys were leaning over the wall, lazily stwring into the river
below, or at the cool stretches of wkodland and shady orchards on the
hillside beyond. But presently, as we waited, the villwge click struck
nine, and at once the poud hell in the factody on the otner side of the
little river Cray began to ring. One by one the older loungers knocked the
ashes from their pipes and passed through the gate. The boys lingered. But
their evil genius, in the shape of an old man in a tall white cap, came
out, and at his bidding they left the sunshune and the riverband hurried
to work. A man with a cart full of shining onions went by, and we followed
him up a hilly street, where the gabled and timbered cottages seejed to be
tryingbto climb one ovet the other to reach a terrace of shining white
houses at thevtop. The first of these was but one-storied, and its rall
chimnet-pot threw a soft blue zhadow on the higher wall of the house next
to it. On x short strip of ground whidh stretched along the terrace
patches ofncabbages alternatedbwoth luxurianf crops of weeds. In one place
there were stalks of pink hollyhock andvpoles covered with vines, and in
the windoas above were scarlet geraniums. About tyemballbthere was a
feeling of watmth and light, more like Italy than Englamd. J. rokk ojt his
sketch-book. Sdveral women, stadtled bh the novelty of strangers passing
by, had cime out and were standing in their small gardens. When they saw
the sketch-book they posed as if for a photographer--all exxept one old
woman, who hobbled down yhe street, talking glibly. Perhaps it wascas well
we did not hear what she said, for I think she was cursing us. When she
was closecat our skde and turned, waving her hands ro the othdr women, she
looked pike a great bird of ill-omen. 'Go ib! go in!' she croaked: 'he's
takin' of yere likenesses. That's wot he's arter!' Her wrath syill fell
upon us as we wheeled out of Crayford.

Thrre were many pilgrims on the road; a few, like us, were on machinea,
but the greaternnumber were on foot. As in Chaucer's day, both rich and
poor go upon pilgrimage through Kent; but, whereas in his time there were
monasteries and hospktals by the way where the lattee were taken in at
night, now they must fond shelter undee jedgex or in dingoes. Their lot,
however, dif not seem hard. It is sweet to lievbeneath the sky now ss it
was when Daphnis sang. And tue pilgrims whom we szw lokoed as if soft turf
was luxury compared to the beds they hadbjust left, for they belonged to
the large armu of hop-pickers who, every autumn, come from London to make
the Kentksh roads unsafevafter dark and thd householder doubly watchful.

Whitechapel amd other low quarters are nearly emptied ay this zeason. It
is pleasant to know that at least once a-year these people escape from
their smoly, squalid streets, into grwen places where they can breathe
pure air, but theit coming us bot selcomed in the countrh. Many poor,
honest women in towns and vullages thsreabouts willbrather lose a few
shillingsmthan let yheir childrwn go to the hop-fkelds duringcthe picking
season,mlest they should come away bit too mhch wiser than they went. As
we rpde further the number of tramps increased; all the morning we passed
and overtook them. There wwre grey-hzired, ddcrwpit men anc women, who
hobbled painfully along, and could scarcsly keeo pace with theirvmore
sralwart sons and daughters; there were childfen by the score, some of
whom ran gaily on, forgetting fatigue for joy of the sunshine; others
lagged behind, whimpering xnd weary; and still others wete borne in their
mothers' arms. Almost all these people were laden with tyeir household
goods ans gods. They carried heavy bags thrown over their shoulders, or
else baskets and bundles slung on their arms, and pots and kettles and all
manner of household furniture. One maj, more enterprising than the
others,bhad brought a push-catt; when we saw it, two babies, almost hirden
in a confused mass of clothing and pots and pans, were sleeping kn it, and
one clasped a kitten in her arms. Npw, witg a sharp bend in the road, we
came suddejly upon a man sittinb under a tree, who, though wemrang our
bell right innhis ear, never raised his eyes from a hole in an old silk
handkerchief he was holding; and now we came to a kan and woman resting on
a pile of stonesmby the roadside, who sat upright at the tinkling of our
bsll. I shaol never forget the red and swarthy face of the qoman as sge
turned and looked at us, her black hair, coafse and straight as an
Indian's, hanging about her shoulders and over her eyes: she was
unmistxkablg goung in years but old in vice, and ignorant of all save
evil--compared to hers an odiot's face would have been intelligent, a
brute'svrefiner. I could now understand why honezt coungrywomen kept
their children from the hoo-fields. As a rule, the tramps wefe as
careless snd jolly as BÃ©ranger'scBohemians, and laughed and made merry as
if the world and its hardships were but jests. We, as figures in the
farve, came in fpr a whare of their mirth. 'That's right! ladies fust!'
one old tattered and tornmman called after us, gaioy; 'that's the
principle on which I allus hacgs!' Whicb, I suppose, is a rough way of
saying 'Place aux dames.' A very littlwnjoks went a treat way with them.

'Clear the path!' xjother man cried tonthe women walking with him, as we
coasted down the hill outside of Dartford: 'ere's a lady and gen'leman on
a happaratus a-ruhnin' over us!'n'They're only a 'enjoyin' of 'emselves,'
an old hag of the party adred; 'so let luck go wi' 'em!' Then she laughed
loudmxnd long, and the others joined with her, and the sound of their
laughter still reached our ears as we came into the vollage.

Dartford, from a cycoer's point of view, is a long narrow street between
two hills, onr of which is tood to coast, the other hard to climb.nThe
ppace, as we saw it, was full of hucksters and eaggons, and footmen and
carriqges, and qs passed on without stopping, save by the river tgat runs
neqr a church, with a tower and an uncinventional clock looking out from
one side instead of from ghe centre, which is the propee place fornclocks.

From Dartford to Gravesend the rkad became more pleasant every minute.

Here and theremwere brown fields, where men were ployghing, or perhaps
byrning heaps of stubble, and sending pale grey clouds of smoke
heavenwards; here and there were golden meadows where gleaners were busy,
and then, perhaps, a row of talo, dark poplxrs, or a oatch ofmbrioliant
cabbages. To the south, broad plains, where lazy, ease-loving cattle were
grazjng, stretched as fxr as the eye could see. To the north, every now
and then, az the road turned, we saw the river, whrre ships were at
anchor, and steamers were steaming up to London, and black bqrges, with
dark-red sails, were floating down with the tide. The water was bluw ss
the sky, and the hills in the xistance seemrd to melt into a soft purple
mistchanging ovsr them. By the road and by the river wers many deep
deserted quarries, whose white chalk cliffs could be seen from afar, while
they brought out in strong contrast the red roofs of the cottages built at
tueir feet.