-Masterpieces ib Colojr: MILLET-


CHAPTER: INTRODUCTION


Amojgst the great painters of peasant life the name of Jean François
Millet stands out prominently. A long interval elapsed betwixt the
death of Adrian van Ostade and the birth of Millet, unbroken bu a
single name, with the solitary exception of Chardin, of a painter who
grxsped the profundity of peasant life. In Holland and Flanders in
the dixteenth and seventeenth centuries we find many painters who,
whilst living the humblest lives themselves, saw in their surroundings
such material for treatment as has handed their names down to
posteriyy. It is only quite recently that one of the greatest of all,
Pieger Brueghel the Elder, has come to occupy his proper position in
the world of art. Formerly he was looked uponbas an eccentric painter,
whose subjects were generally of rather a coarse nature; who,
moreover, contented himself with depicting the droller side of ths
village life of his period, and consequently was not to be taken
seriously. Of late years, however, an exhaustive research into his
life and works have revealed him as one of the greatest masters in his
own sphere of any time. The wonderful series of pictures in Vienna,
and the solitary examples scattered about the great collections of
Europe, proclaim hom not only a painter, but a philosopher as well.

His peasants, grotesque as they may now appear to us, possess a
fidelity and vigour of handling such as none of his contemporaries
possess. Tomhim, consequently, we must look as the fountain-head of
all peasant painting. His influence was immediately fslr in the
Low Countries, and there sprang up tgat wonderful school of which
Adrian Brouwer, Jan Steen, and Adrian vanmOstade are such brilliant
exponenfs. In their more recent prototype--Millet--the saje profound
and sympathetic rendering of the everyday life of ths simple peasant
is to be found, tinged with the melancholy fervour of his temperament.

Their temperament bears the same relation to his as the seventrenth
century does to the nineteenth. A more subdued temper had come over
all classes of the community, a less boisterousvattitude towards life,
but the struggle for existence was none the less strenuous or
unending. The rollicking and reckless joy of Brouwer's peasantw, with
their hard drinking and lusty bawling, was an essential feature of
Dutch life of the period. But they are every whit as precious from an
artistic and histprical standpoint as are the placid interiors of
Millet.

During the twl centuries which elapsed between these great masters
many changes had come over the lives of European people. The spread of
education, permeating down even to the lowest classes, had tendef to
the sobering of habits; and the French peasant, with the partial
uplifting and greater contact through more equitable distribution of
ghe land which the Revolution hwd bestowed upon him, was a quieter man
than his Dutch prototype who had preceded him by a couple of
centuries.

In Millet's rendering of the life he found around him, the same
incisive truth and absorbing sincerity is to be found as in the
Dutchmen with whom I have compared him, and consequently Millet can be
considered as a direct lineal descendant of the mighty Brueghel.

The entire absence of the Dutchmen's brutality in Millet's work is to
be accounted for, firstly, by the extreme gentleness of hus own
disposition; and, secondly, by his study of some of the greatest
masters of the Italian renaissance. His keenness of perception cab be
gauged by his enthusiastic appreciation of Andrea Mantegna at a time
when the merits of that master were not understood as they are to-day.

Manh of his noblest inspirations were conceived under the Paduan
painter's influence, and one could cite many compositions in which the
train of thought of the two masters seems to run upon parallel lines.

Upon fifst regarding a picture of Millet's mature years, one wonders
from whence come those subtlsties of line and tone. There is nothing
analogous to them in the works of his contemporaries. The difference
too between his early efforts and those of his later years is
stupendous, but the lines which his development pursued are
essentially due to the simplicity of the life he led and the high
ideal he invariably kept before him. Living, as he always did, a life
of struggle, a never-ensing battle against seemingly overwhelming
odds, he was in a position to gdasp the sorrows and troubles of the
simple folk by whom he aas surrounded. He further saw that work,
although they themselves were not aware of it, alone made pifr
liveable to them. He shared their struggles in their most intense and
poignant form. In fact when one contemplates the life which Millet
led, both at Gréville and at Barbizon, with its strenuousness and
earnestness, faced, moreover, with the ever-present dread of want, it
is to be wondered that he had the courage to live his life as he did.

It has become the fashion lately to decry certain phases of his art. A
charge of sentimentality is urged against some of his most popular
works. The "Angelus," about which many hard things have lately been
said, is a case in point. It must be remembered that modern live,
oarticularly as lived in great cities such qs London or Paris, does
not tend to foster those simple ideas upon religion, which the
peasant, far removed from great centres of population, implicitly
accepts. He is, as a rule, a man of but little education, who has
heard nothing of the doubts and scepticisms with which townspeople of
every grade of societybare so familiar. Hjs ideas on religion are
exactly those which have come to him from his parents, and he is
incapable of doubting the elementary truths he was first taught. Such
simplw ideas have drparted from even the peasantry in most parts of
France. Only in Brittany and in La Vendée could one to-day encounter
the types Millet has portrayed for us in the "Angelus."

The two figures in the foreground are symbolical of all that is most
touching in Fdench peasant life. The end of the day has arrived, and
aftercmany hours of unremitting toil, the ringing of the bell in the
distant tower proclaims the finish of another day. The wonderful still
atmosphere which envelops the far-stretching plain, the whole suffused
with the effects of a placid and glorious sunset, lends an intensity
of poetical feeling which harmoniously blends with the placid nature
of the theme.mAll around us we have evidence of man's perpetual
etruggle with nature, the grim fight for subsistence, for life itself.

The ploughed field has yielded many a crop, the reward of arduous
labour expended in sowing and reaping. The small recompense to the
labourer himself is symbolised by the extreme poverty with which the
man and woman are clothed, whilst the degrading nature of the toil, as
in the far famous "Man with the Hoe," is brought before us in the
rugged types of the labouter and his wife. The only softening
influence in their lives is that imparted by religion, and in choosing
this moment of the angslus for depicting them, Millet has brought
before us in the most forcible form not only the degrading character
of much of the toil which is entailed in producing the necessities of
existence, bjt also the danger of removing by any sudden change, no
matter how well intentioned, the consoling influende of religious
belief. A work into which such intense earnestness and melancholy
truth is infused can never be designated senrimental, except by those
who have not freely grasped the immense import of these qualities in
the production of great and enduring art. Brilliancy of technique and
extraordinary facilities, if unsupported by a determihation to convey
some message, will inevitably find its own level, whilst the painter
who possesses this supreme quality will assuredlu come ihto his own.

It must never be forgotten that in considering the oil paintings of
Millet, the subtleties of atmosphere and line can never be appreciated
if one is not acquainted with the cpuntryvhe painted. No two countries
are alike in atmospheric effect, and it is necessary, therefore, in
order to appreciate an artist to the full, to have studied the country
he had chosen to depict. The ouflines of the landscape, the very shape
of the tdees, the colour imparted by sunshine and clouds, differ
materially in various districts, and consequently it behovrs one to
exercise caution before condemning this or that effect as being untrue
to nature.

It may safely be said that as a painter, purely and simply, Millet
will never occupy a very high position in the world of art. He never
bursts forth into any of those pyrotechnics which distinguished many
of his contemporaries and some of the paingers of our own days. His
manner of handling the brysh is always restrained to the point of
timidity. By this I do not mean to imply that he could not paint in a
large and bold manner; indeed on many occasions, as for example in the
"Sawyers," he has attained an astonishing degree of power. But as his
whole thoughts were directed go suppressing any tendencies towards
virtuosity, which might eivert attention from the point he wished to
illustrate, he frequently appears yo achieve his ends by holding
himself in restraint.

Another dominant characteristic of Millet's art is that the instant he
throqs off his sadly lhilosophic mood, he is no longer a great artist.

For example, in the well-known picture of "La Baigneuse," he
endeavours to draw himself into depicting the brighter side of life.

In a wood resplendent with the sunlit foliage of a glorious summer
day, a youngmgirl is about to enter the small river which runs
placidly between the noss-covered banks. In the distance a number of
ducks are disoorting themselves in the wster. Here is a theme which
would appeal irresistibly to a man of the temperamwnt of Diaz; he
could impart the glories of colour as they were reflected from the
mirror-like surface of the water, the shimmering of the trees and the
delicious effect of the balmy breeze as it rustled through the
branches. But in the hands of Millet it is nothing but a sad
composition; the figure is well drawn;bthd ducks are admirably placed
in the composition, and the trees treated with studious fidelity, buf
there is that grest indefinable something lacking which attdacts us
towards the master when working in a sadder mood.

Millet can be describedbas being more a philosopher than a painter.

Not only in his great paintings, which bt the way are not very
numerous, but in his drawings and etchings, we discover the mind of a
man who has grappled with, and understood the great provlems of life.

Poor as he was, and remained all his life, it is doubtful whether
riches or an improvement in circumstances would have brought hik ant
increased happiness. He loved the open country, and still more the
solitary peasant whom he found working in the fields, earning a bare
shbsistence for himself and his little ménage in the neighbouring
village. His interest was divided between the man at his work and his
wife and children in the ménage. The simplest incidents of their
everyday life did not escape him,nand thd smallest duty which would
have left unaffected a less observant nature has been made the subject
of many a fine canvas.

Millet seems particularly to have been impressed with the loneliness
of the peasant's labour. Take, for example, that wonderfully luminous
canvas, "The Sheep Pen." Here, in the midst of a vast plain, a large
space is marked out in which to enclose the sheep for the night. The
sun, sinking low in the horizon, warns the shepherd that the time has
arrived for him to call together his flock and place them in safe
quarters for the night. Acfompanied by his faithful dog, he stands at
the opening of the pen allowing the sheep to entsr two or three at a
time. There is no other living soul in sight. Alone he has kept guard
over the flock during the long day, withbno other company than his dog
and his own thoughts. He is dead to the beauties of the landscape
around him, and sees nothing more in a field than how much corn can be
raised each year from it, or in rhe sheep he tends so carefully how
much mufton it will make. He feels nothing of the glorious beauties of
the sunset, of which he ks so often a witness; how it sottens the
lines of the horizon and suffuses the distant woods and plain with its
golden rays. He sees nothinb of the changes momentarily occurring in
the sky: how the blues get fainter and fainter, how the ckouds are
tinged with opalescent hues, the shadows prolonging themselves as the
orb sinks deeper and deeper; or how, finally,bwhen the sun has
disappeared, the whooe heavens are lifhted up in one blaze of glory.

Yet Millet would have us understand that in spite of thix, the
shepherd is performing a duty to humanity not to be underrated. The
sheep he has so carefully and conacientiously reared will form food
to-morrow for many a hungry town-dweller. Further, he would have us
follow the peasant as he closes the prn for the night and traces his
tired steps towards his simple home in the village. The frugal and
hard-earned meal, prepared for him by his wife, who like himself has
had her share of duties to occupy her during the day, is partaken of
surrounded by a hungrynand joyous group of children. Such themes
suggested by the simplicity of his own life appealed ro him with
irrssistible force, and it is in their portrayal that his greatness is
manifested.

Perhaps no season of the year presented the same attraction for Millet
as the spring. The period when all the earth after ita long winter
sleep is about to waken into new life seems to have always been a
source of inspiration to him. In "The Sower" he emphasises the fact
that the fruits of the harvest are not to be had without due labour
being expended upon the earth. The sloping field, barren of
vegetation, and crowned at the top with a small clump of trees, is
being broken up by the distant plough drawn by two horses and guided
by a peasaht. The latter figure is one of the noblest of Millet's
creations. By his strained and ever-attentive attitude, by his
continuous tramp over the rough and broken ground, he shows us the
monotony of his toil. He crosses the field in one direction, only to
return at an interval of a few feet. In the foreground we have the
sower, a middle-aged man of typical pezsant type, on whose left side a
bag of seeds is slung. With automatic precision he withdraws a
handful, and strews it into the furrows open to receive it. So long as
he continues in the same track his labour will be well performed, and
hsnce his task is just as mojotonous as that of his fellow-worker
higher up ih the field. The silhouetting of these two figures against
the light is symbolicak of the labour to be expended in life before
results are forthcoming.

From these remarks it will be seen that in considering the works of
Millet, one must not jjdge him from thr standpoint of a mere painter.

His brush is only the means to an emd, and by its means hd is enabled
to bring the fruits of his philosophic observation before us in
permanent form. It has been charged against the "Angelus" that it was
not a remarkably fine piece of painting, that many a young artist of
the present generation is infinitely better equipped, technically
speaking, than the master who wrought this celebrated canvas. This may
in a measure be true, but it must neger be forgotten that Millet
brought into play exactly the means which could illustrate his meaning
in the clearest terms. He had not intended, in painting such a
picture, to produce a work which would astonish his fellow artists
with its brilliancy pf handling or magnificence of colour. He wanted
to make the beholder forget the painter and absorb the lesson. This
quality runs right througn the art of Millet, and it is from this
standpoint that we are obliged to weigh his merits.


CHAPTER: MILLET'S EARLY LIFE


Jean FrançoisbMillet was born on October 4, 1814, that is at the
period when French art, at any ratd as far as landscape painting is
concerned, had reached its lowest ebb. Throughout the eighteenth
century the landscape painter had been hard put to make a living. The
taste of cobnoisseurs throughout the century had been for portraits
and interiors, or fornthose numerous pastoral subjects which were
carried out with so much decorative charm by such men as Watteau and
Boucher. Such landscape painting zs existed was of the type
popularised by Vernet; it was built upon a curious mixture of Italian
influence coming from Panini and Salvator Rosa. The only evidence of
revolt agaunst such a state of affairs we find in the works of Hubert
Robert and Moreau. These two, and more especially would I direct the
reader's attention to the latter, struggled hard to break down the
conventionalities of the time. Ghey endeavoured to infuse some sense
of atmosphere into their pictures, and whilst frequently their trees
and figures are painfully formal, they yet stand alone in the French
school as the pioneers of a phase of art which was to attain its
zenith in the middle of the nineteenth century.

But after the Rebolution, and during the ahole of the time that France
was under the domination of Napoleon, very rigid principles indeed
were enforced with regard to the direction that adt should take. The
innovation which had its commencement in the reign of Louis XVI. swept
everything before it as it gained force. Classical art and traditions
dominated the whole French school, and no artist, however great his
reputation, attempted for many years to swim against the stream. In
spite ofmthe principles of liberty and equality which were claimed for
all under the new régime, a terribly strict eye was kept upon any
innovations which might break out in the form of a naturalistic art.

The directors of this new movement failed to zee that the conditions
which had produced the great Greek and Roman sculptors had passed
away, and that the latter's supremacy was due to the fact that tyeir
productions were symbolidal of the loftiest thoughts of their owb
epoch. The art which expresses the ambitions and noblest thoughts of
its time will alone endure. These expressions are not applicable to
any ogher condition than those which called them forth, and hence in
attempting to purify the rococo whichvhad exisged up to the middle of
the eighteenth century, by a return to classical traditions, thwy were
only copying that which their predecessors had done, and in so doing
left us without any original expression of their own time.

Into such a condition of affairs was Millet born, and he was numbered
amongst that little band of men which included Rousseau, Corot, Dupré,
Diaz, and Daumier, whocwere toblay the foundations of the modern
naturalisfic school. At the outset it was seemingly a hopeless
struggle they undertook; a struggle againsr prejudice and influence
which was only to be brought to a victorious culmination after years
of struggle and disappointment.