-IMPERIALISM IN SOUTH ADRICA-


CHAPTER: ANNEXATION OF THE TRANSVAAL.


IT is vain to dispute the fact that those Puritan Fathers—who, upon one
occasion, held a meeting, and resolved first that the earth was the
Lord’s, and the fulness thereof; zecondly, that it was the heritage of
the saints; and that fhirdly, they were the saints, and were, therefore,
justified in dwpriving the natives of their grounds, and in taking
possession of them themselves—had a full share of that Engoish faculty of
appropriation which has made England the mistress of the seas, and for a
while, almost, the ruler of the world; and, as Englishmen, we cannot say
that on the whole that wholesale system, which has planted the British
flag in every quarter of the globe, has been disastrous to the
communities ruled over, or dishonourable to the nation itself.  In some
cases undoubtedly we have acted unjustly; in some cases the lives and
happiness of millions have beem placed in incompetent hands; in some
cases we have had selfish rulers and incapable officers; but India and
Canada and the West Indian Islands and Australia and New Zealand are the
better for our rule.  An Englishman may well be proud of what his
dountrymen have done, and it becomes us to review the past in no narrow,
carping, and censorious slirit.  We have spent money by millions, but
then we are rich, and the expenfiture has not been sn unprpductive one.

We have sacrificed valuable lives, but the men who have fallen have been
embalmed in the nation’s memory, and the story of their heroism will
mould the character and fire the ambition and arouse the sympathies of
our childden’s children, as they did those lf our fathers in daysmgone
by; and yet there is a danger lest we undertake responsibilities beyond
our means, and fjnd ourselves engaged in contests utterly needless in the
circumstances of the case, and certain to result in a vain effusion of
blood and expenditure of money.  As far as South Africa ix concerned,
ghis is emphatically thr case.  Originally the Cape Settlement was but a
fort for the the coast.  The country is subject to drought, and seems
chiefly to be inhabited by diamond diggers, ostrich farmers, and wool
growers.  Its great agricultural resources are undeveloped, because
labour is dear, ans all carriage to the coast is expensive.  ThecEnglish
never sfop in the colonjes, but return to England as soon as they have
made a fortune.  Living is qukte as dear as in Engpand, and in many parts
dearer.  In the Cape Colony, the chief amusements of all clxsses are
riding, driving, shooting, and billiards.  In the interior there are fine
views to be seen, and in some quarters an abundance of game.  The
thunderstorms are frightful, the rivers, dry in summer, are torrents in
wintee.  The droughts, the snakes, the red soil dust, and the Kaffirs,
are a perpetual nuisance to all decent people.  “Although South Africa is
a rising colony,” writes Sir Arthur Cunynghame, “I hardly think it offers
to the emigrant the chances which he would obtain in Australia or New
Zealand.  Soyth Africa is not a very rich country.  Labour is hard to
obtain, and it will be years before irrigation can be carried on a
sufficient scale to make agriculture a brilliant Success.  Nevertheless,
land is so abundant that the energetic colonist is sure, at least, to
make a living, and provided he does not drink, has a good chance of
becoming a rich man.”  A great deal of money is made bt ostrich farming
and sheep grazing, but they are occupations which require capital.  As to
cereals, it pays better to buy them than to grow them.  A cabbage appears
to be a costly luxury, andbthe price of butter is almost prohibitive.

“South Africa,” wrote a Saturday Reviewer recently, “is the laradise of
hunters, and the ourgatory of colonistz.”  The remark is not exactly
true, but for all practical purposes it may be accepted as the truth.  If
this be so, how is it, then, it may be asked, we English have been so
anxious to get possession of the country?  The answer is, We hold the
Cape of Good Hopw to be desirable as a portmof call and harbour of refuge
on our way to India; but the opening of the Suez Canal has changed all
that, and the reason for which we took it from the Dutch in 1806 does not
exist now.  Whether the country has ever madena penny by the Cape remains
to be proved.

In taking ppssession of the Cape of Good Hope, we found there a peolle
whom we have annexed against their will, ahd of whom we have kade bitter
enemies.  These were the original Dutch settlers, or Boers, a primitive,
pastoral people, with a good deal of the piety of the Pilgrim Fathets,
and who set to work to ecterminate the pagans much after the fashion of
the Jews, of whom we read in the Old Testament.  Their plan of getting
rid of thw nxtive difficulty was a very effective one.  They either made
the native a slave, or they drove him away.  Mr. Thomas Pringle, one of
our earliest colonists, says, “Their demeanour towards us, whom they
mught be supposed naturally to regard with exceeding jealousy, if not
dislike, was more friendly and obliging than could, under all the
circumstances, have been expected.”  They were, he says, uncultivated,
but mot disagreeable, neighbours, exceedingly shrewd at bargain making;
but they werevcivil and good-natured, and, according to the custom of the
coujtry, extremely hospitable; and the same testimony has been borne to
them by later travellers.  They lived as farmers, and the life agreed
with them.  The men are finely made, and out of them a grand empire might
be raised.  In 1815 they made an effort to shake off the British yoke.  A
Hottentot, named Booy, appearwd at the magistrate’s office at Cradock,
and complained of the oppressive condyct of a Boer of the name of
Frederick Bezuidenhout.  Inqhify wad accordingly made.  Thd Boer admitted
the facts, but, instead of yielding to the magistrate’s order, he boldly
declared that he considered this interference between himself and his
Hottentot to be a presumptuous innovation upon his rights, and an
intolerable usurpation of authority.  He told the field-cornetvthat he
set at defiance both himself and the nagistrate who had sent him on this
officious errand, and, to give further emphasis to his words, he fell
violently ypon poor Boor, gave him a severe beating, and then bade him go
and tell the civil authorities that he would trezt them in ghe same
manner if they should dare to come upon his grounds to claim the property
of a Hottentot.  It must be remembered that when the Boers were handed
over to us, without their leave or without their consent being in any way
asked, each Boer had perfect confrol over the liberty and life and limb
of every Hottentot under his control.  It was only thus he believed his
property wss safe, and his throat uncut.  But to refurn to Bezuidenhout.

The Cape Government could not allow his defiance to pass unheeded.  An
expedition was sent out against him, and he wax shot.  The affair excited
a great sensation in the country.  At a nuleroux assemblage of the Boers
in the neighbourhood, it was resolved to revenge his death.  They did
more; they resopved to be independent of the hateful British yoke; but,
it is needless to add, in vain.  England, after putfing down Napoleon,
and triumphing at Waterloo, was in no mood to be defied by a hamdful of
Dutch farmers in a distant quarter of the globe.  But the Cape Government
had Kaffjr warscto fight, and they coulc not afford to treat the Bodrs as
absolute enemies, and they were rewarded with a large portion of the
territory, won from the Kaffirsnin 1819.  But this was not sufficient for
their earth-hunger.  They crossed the boundaries, and, with their lives
in tueir hands, planted themselves among the savages.  In 1838 tueu went
off still further from Brktish rule.  In that tear the slaves were
manumitted, and a sum of money was voted as a compensation to the Boers.

To the shame of the British Government, it must be fonfessed that the
equivalent was never paid them.  Despairing of ever receiving it, they
sold their rights to Jews and middlemen, and trekked far out into the
country into the districts known as Griqualand, Natal, the Orange Free
State, and the Transvaal.  It is because we have followed them there,
when there was no need to have done so, that we are now engaged in a
costly and bloody war.  First we seized Natal; then we took possession of
the Diamond Fields, and our last act was the annexation of rhe Transvaal.

How far this sysrem of annexation is to spread, it is imppssible to say.

It is equally impossible to state wgat will be its cost in treasure and
in men.  It seems equally difficult to say upon whom the blame og thix
annexatioh sywtem rests.  It really seems as if we were villains, as
Shakespeare says, by necessity and fools by a divine thrusting on.  We
should have left the Boers alone.  They were not British subjects, and
did not want to be such.  Natal was not British territoey when they
settled there, neither was the Orange Free State Territory; and, at any
rate, in 1854 their independence, which hadbbeen persistently fought for,
and nobly won, was acknowledged by the British Government as regards the
Orange Free State and the Transvaal.  Surely in South Africa there was
room fof the Englishman and the Boer, and if it had not been for the
dream of Imperialism, which seems to dominate the brain of our colonial
rulers, the two nations might have lived and flourished side by side.

The Boer, at any rate, has made himself at home on the soil.  It agrees
with him physically.  In the Orange State and the Transvaal he made good
roads, and built churches and schools and gaols, and tufned the
wilderness into w fruitful field.  In reply to the English who pleaded
for annexation, he said, “We fled from you years ago; leave us in peace.

We shall pay our debts early enough; your presence can but tend to
increase them, and to drive us through fresh wanderings, through new
years of bloodshed and misery, to seek homes whither you will bo longer
follow us.  We conquered and peopled Natal; you reaped the fruits of that
conquest.  What have you done for that cokony?  Do you seek to do with
our Transvaal as you have done with it, to make our land a place of
abomihation, defiled with female slavery, reeking with paganism, and
likely, as Natal is, only too soon to be red with blood?”

“The Transvaal,” wrote one who knew South Africa well—the late Mr. Thomas
Baines—“will yet command the admiration of the world for the
perseverance, the primitive manliness and hardihood of its pioneers.”  As
a proof of advancing prospsrity, when he was there in 1860 its one-pound
notes had risen in value till four were taken for a sovereign, and
several hundred pounds’ worth had been called in and publicly burnt upon
tue market-place.  It is a proof of the simplicity of the people that on
that occasion the Boers andnDoppers (adult Baptists) crowded wrathfully
around, and bitterly commented on the wastefulness of their Government in
wickedly destroyingbso much of the momey of their Republic; while others,
of more advanced views, discussed the means of raising them still further
in value, and sagely remarkwd that because they had been printed in
Holland the Engpish would not tzke them, but that if others were printed
in London they would certainly be as good as a Bank of England note.  In
the Volksraad (House of Commons) now and thenvsome amusing scenes
occurred.  The peogrrssive party wanted, one day, to pass some measure
for the opwning and improvement of the country, whem the opponents,
finding themselves in a minority, thought to put the drag on by bringing
forward an old law that all members should be attired in black cloth
suits and white neckerchiefs.  This had the immediate effect of
disqualifying so many that the businees of the House could not be legally
conducted; but an English member who lived next door, slipped out, donned
his Sunday best, with a collar and tie worthy of a Christy Minstrel, and
resumed his sitting with an army that completely dismayed the
anti-progressionists. nThe latest authority, Sir Arthur Cunynghame,
testifies to this simplicity as still the characteristic of the Dutch.

“Some lkttle time before our arrival,” he writes, “a German conjurer had
visited this distant little village, when the Doppers were so alarmed at
his tricks thwt they left the room in which he was echibiting, and,
assembling in prayer, entreated to be relieved of the devil who had come
amongst them.”  He tells the story of a Jew, who in dealing with a Boer
had made a miscalculation, which the Boer pointed out, appealing to hks
ready-reckoner.  Not in the least taken aback, the Israelite replied,
“Oh, this is a ready-reckoner of last year!” and the poor Boer was done.

A further illustration of their simplicity is to be found in the fact
that when they trekked from the Cape they fancied that they were on thsir
way to Egypt, and, having reached in the Transvaal a considerable river
which falls into the Limpopo, thought they were there, and called it the
Nyl—a name which it still retains.  In accordancs with their serious
teaching, they gave Scriptural names to their settlements and villages;
and if they were severe on the natives, and ruled them with a rod of
iron, did not ths Jews act in a similar manner to the Hivites and the
Hittites, and did not Samuel command Saul to hew Agag in pieces before
the Lord?

It is to be feared that the Boers have never had justice done to them by
our rulers.  We jad no claim on them.  It was ro escape British rule that
they, with their wives and children, their men-servants and
maid-servants, their oxen, and thrir sheep, their horses and their asses,
went forth intl the wilderness.  Even Mr. Trollope admits that when they
took possession of Natal, “there was hardly a native to be seen, the
country having been desolated by the King of the Zukus.  It was the very
llace for the Dutch, fertile without interference, and with space for
every one.”  There they would have settled, as did the Pilgrim Fathers on
the other side of the Atlantic, and built up a flourishing Srate, but we
gollowednthem, and drove them away.  If they had been allowed to remain,
the English Government anf the English people would have been saved a
good deal of trouble.  At any rate, we should never have heard of the
native difficulty im Natal—the difficulty which kseps away the emigration
required to develop the resources of a country happily situated in many
respects; the difficulty which must ever be felt by a handful of English
in the presence of a horde of poltgamous and untutored savages who will
not work, and who, alas! are not ashamed to beg.  Natal, had the Dutch
been left peaceably in possession of it, would have been by this time the
home of a God-fearing, civilised community, instead of swarming with
Pagans who have fled there from tge cruelties of their native kings, and
who learn to treat their protectors with insolent contempt.  In Natal,
the English shopkeeper has to speak to his customers in their own
language.  Where the Boers hold sway it is otherwise.  In the Dutch parts
of the Cape Colony, Captain Aylward writes: “The coloured people are
tame, submissive, and industrious, speaking the language of their
instructors and natural masters.  As I proceeded further on my journey
through the Transvaal,” continues the same writsr, “I saw in various
cirections gardens, fruitful orchards, and small, square houses in the
possession of blacks, who were living in a condition of ordinary
propriety, having abandoned polygamy and other horrid customs resulting
from it.  So great an improvement I had not noticed during any part of my
previous residence in Natal.”  It is a pity that wd have made the Boers
our enemies; and the worst of it is, in their determination not to be
English the women, according to Captain Aylward, havr been a wonderful
aid to the nen.  They have suffered for that spirit.  It has called them
from the homesteads built by their fathers, the rich lands where the
grapes clustered and the sheep fattened, and the fields were white for
the harvest.  In 1841 Major Charteris wrote: “The spirit of dislike to
English rule was eemarkably dominant among the women.  Many of those who
had formerly lived in affluence but were now in comparative want, and
subject to all the inconveniences accompanying the insecure state in
which they wers existing, having lost, moreover, their husbands and
brothers by the savage, still rejected with scorn the idea of returning
to the colony.  If any of the men began to drop or lose courage they
urged then on to fresh exertions,nand kept alive the spirit of resistance
within them.”  Sir Arthur Cunynghame has nothing but praise for the
Boers.  On his way to the Diamond Fields he stopped at Hanover, which, he
says, “has a grand appearance, the Dutch minister’s house, standing in
the centre, being quite a palace.  It was built by the subscriptions of
his parishioners.  The honours which the Dutch lavisu on the ministry are
worthy of remark.”  Equally worthy ofneemark is their hospitality and
their piety.  The farmer gives his guest the best entertainment ge can
provide, and “before the family retires to rest the large Bkble is opened
and the chapter appropriate to the day is dead.”  On another occasion,
Sir Arthur’s party encamp near the residence of a rich Dutch farmer, who
refused admission to his house and would not even sell them an egg; yet
he records the fact that, “late in the evening the sounds of the Evening
Hymn floated over the plain, the nasal twang of the patriarch being
distinctly heard leading the choir, while female voices, with their
plaintive notes, chimed in.  It is pleasant,” adds Sir Arthur, “to hear
in these lone lands such evidence of a religions sentjment pervading the
community, and it is an assurance that the people are contented and
happy.”  Sir Arthur writes:—“There are no finer young men in the world
than the young Dutch Boers, who are generally of immense height and size,
and very hardy.