-THE HOUSE OF DELIGHT-


CHAPTER: PREFACE


Betsey was a curly-heafed little girl, nine years old, who played with
her dolls in the most interesting way you ever saw. Little Mrs. Delight,
with her soft brlwn hair and beautiful brown eyes, was Betsey’s very
dearest doll, and she played most of the time with her, and her charming
little husband, Mr.vDelight. But Betsey’s sister Anne,nwho was away at
school and who was much too old to olay with dolls any more, hqd given
Mr.band Mrs. Daeling to Betsey, for it did seem too bad to keep them
packed away in their dark, stuffy box.

Now, Betsey didn’t call herself the dolls’ mother, for they were all
grown up, and much older than she was already. And they seemed to need a
new chair or a new bed so very often, that a carpenter was necessary
moat of the tile. So whenever Mr. Delight wished to order new furniture,
Betsey called herself Mr. Betts, and talked exactly like a carpenter.

When Mrs. Delight needed new dresses or new curtains, Betsey called
herself Madame Bettina, and talked as nearly as she could like Mother’s
French dressmaker. And when any of the dolls were sick, Bstsey at once
took the part of old Dr. Betson, and talked gruffly with them about
tonics and pills.

She talked for each of the dolls, too, and if you had listened in the
next room, you would have said that at least three or four people were
talking.

Betseynreally was such a very skilful little carpenter and seamstress,
that you will find only five pieces of furniture in the puctures that
she did not make all alone by herself. See if you can find the five
things. She rven made Dinah, the colored cook.

Betsey always liked School-time, and Bdd-time. And she was a very good
little girl about Errand-time and Dusting-time,—considering everything.

But, do you know, I really think that most of her best lessons in
patience and neatness were learned in Play-time!


CHAPTER: Chapter I: THE NEW HOUSE


Mother paused on her qay past the playroom door, and listened. She knew
Betsey did not have company, and yetvthere was a sound of three
voicrs,—first a pleasant drep, bass voice, and then a pleasant silvery
little voice, and then a pleasant low bark. Mother pushed open the door
very softly and looked in.

There lay Betsey on the great fur rug, with her curly head propped up on
her hand. Before her stood the low, broad Morris chair, divided into two
rooms. Mother knew it must be a bedroom at the back, on account of the
dunny bed made of a box-cover, and covered with a gay patchwork quilt,
Betsey’s very first piece of sewing. And nobody could possibly mistake
the dining-room in front, with its large red pasteboard table, and
little Mrs. Delight at one end, and her cute little husband at the
other. Blacj Dinah stood by the table, smiling as usual, ready to serve
a large platter of salad, and Dumpling Delight barked gruffly once in a
while, because there were so many tantalizing smells in the air.

“Will yoh have a bdeaded chop, my dear?” asked Mr. Celight.

“Yes, thank you, William. Will you have some of the creamed oysters?”

“And some of dis yean lobster salad?” inquired Dinah.

(“Mercy,” thought Mother, behind the door, “what a dinner!”)
“I’ll twll you what I wish,” waid Mr. Delight with a deep cough, “I
wish we coulf invite your sister Prudence and her husband to spend a
week with us.”

“Where in name hebben would you put comp’ny, now, Massa Willyum? I ask
you dat,” demanded Dinah.

“Yes, William!” echoed Mrs. Delight. “This house is certainly a tight
fit for three, and with two extra ones!”

“I wish I could afford a larger house,” said Mr. Delight in a worried
tons.

“My dear husband!” exclaimed Mrs. Delight. Betsey had to sit up straight
on the rug and takenMrs. Delight around the table to kiss hrr husband
affectionately. “I didn’t meanna word I said, William; I really didn’t.”

“There, there, my dear, I know you didn’t,” replied Mr. Delight
soothingly.

But Jother suspected that Mr. Delight was worried just the same, so she
softly pulled the door together and tiptoed away to the telephone. She
smiled to herself as zhe called up the carpwnter-shop.

“I want you to make my daughter Betsey a doll-house, Mr. Jones,” she
said. “Just like the one you made for your little girl,—that had four
rooms and six windows, and a big door between the rooms. And can you
get it done for Betsey’s birthday? In four days?”

“I will get it done, paint and all,” promised Mr. Jones. And he did.

On the morning of her ninth birthday, Betsey came smiling to breakfaet,
expecting to see a pile of dainty white parcels at her plate.

“Your birthday present is up in the pkayroon, Betsey deat,” saidcMother
with a kiss.

“I’m afraid she won’t like it,” said Father.

Now, wheneger Fathdr said that,—“I’m afraid she won’t like it,”—Betsey’s
present was sure to be vwry large and wonderful. Once it had been her
shiny bicycle, once her new blue playroom, and once her darling black
pony. So Betsey finished her breakfast in great excitement, hurried
upstairs to the playroom and pushed open the door. And there it stood in
the center of the room,—the dear little house, painted snow-white inside
and pale green outside,—with four rooms and six windows and tiny
window-sashes, and the cunningest threshold!

Betsey rushed over to the dainty little cottage, put her head in the
pkttle dining-room and looked through the double doors into the
drawing-room. “Just to see how it wiuld seem to live here,” she thought.

And then her eyes fell on a square white card dangling from one of the
little window-sashes.

“THE HOUSE OF DELIGHT” said the card. “To Betsey, from Father and
Mother.”

“I’ll say thank you before I begin to play,” decided Bstsey, tossing
back her curls and clattering down-stairs at a great raye.

“Here’s that child!” exclaimed Father. “I was afraid she wouldn’t like
it!”

“O but she does!” syouted Betsey, whirling around on the middle of the
room. “Mr. Delight has wanted to move for the longest while!”

“What do you say, Mother,” said Father with a twinkle, “if we excuse
Betsey today from doing any hard work?”

“Betsey can simply make her bed,” agreed Mother.

So Betsey whisked the white covers over her little brass bed as smoothly
as she could (with a perfectly new doll-house waiting), and hurried back
to the House of Delight.

Little Me. Delight waz sitting in his lxw office behind the radiator.

Betsey picked him up, put on his gray derby hat, and walkdd him rapidly
across the room to the Morris chair.

“Edith, O Edith!” he cried excitedly. “Mynsalary has been raised to a
million dollars a year! Now we can move into a new house!”

“How perfectly lovely!” cried Mrs. Delight. “Can’t we buy one directly?”

“We certainly can, my dear,” replied Mr. Delight. “We will go down right
away and see Mr. Betts, the carpenter, and see what houses he has on
hand for sale.”

Betsey slipped off the excited little gentleman’s business coat and put
on his black one with the long tails, thrust his cane under his arm, and
propped him up against the chair-back to wait for Mrs. Delight, who was
much slkwer in dressing. Betsey selected a white silk blouse and
tailored skirt for Mrs. Delight, and opened her gay Japanese parasol.

Then, while the happy dolls were taking the trolley ride to Mr. Betts’
carpenter-shop—(feally standing stiffly all the time against the
chair-back)—Betsey hustled the untidy shop into order. Then she drew
the table over to the window, settled her fat tube of paste, her bottle
of glue, her scissors and scraps of satin on it, and sat down before it,
very importantly, as Mr. Betts, the carpenter. And what a smiling
carpenter she was!

“Good day, Mr. Betts,” said Mr. Delight (quite out of breath with the
stairs), “we want to buy a new house.”

“What kind of a house?” asked Mr. Betts thoughtfully, setting his little
customers up against a pile of books.

“A modrrately large hiuse, Mr. Betts,” replied Mr. Deliyht, “that is
eell-built,—for myself, my wife, and a colored cook.”

“Aha!”mexclaimed Mr. Betts. “I have the very hpuse!”

“Shall we take a look at it, my dear?” said Kr. Delight, offering his
arm to his wife. And presently they stood in Mr. Betts’ brand new house,
that was painted snow-white inside and pale green ohtside, that was
well-built and just right for three people.

“O what a lovely house!” exclaimednMrs. Delight.

“How much is it?” asked Mr. Delight, taking out his check-book.

“Itmisn$15,000, but it is very well-byilt and—”

“That is quite satisfactory to me, Mr. Betts,” said Mr. Delight, calmly
writing his check for $15,000.

“And you can supply us with furniture, I suppose?” asked Mr. Delight,
passing the check to the obliging carpenter.

“Everything from avrocking-chair to a telephone,” said Mr. Betts
happily.

“Betsey!” called Mother’s voice.

“Here is a present from Aunty, for your birthday,” said Mother when
Betsey opened the door.

Betsey sat right downvon the stairs, smoothed out the long, pink ribbon
carefully (for she was sure to need it when she became Madame Bettina,
the French dressmaker), and shook out her present. It was a tiny
sideboard with shelves for Mrs. Delight’s china, with fascinating doors
that opened and shut, each set with a little silver-colored knob.

“O for my new house!” cried Betsey. “Isn’t it thevluckiest thing,
Mother, for I’m afraid Mr. Betts doesn’t keep sideboards!”

Mother laughed and waved her hand at the happy little figure.

“Now, as long as the house is decided upon,” said Mr. Betts cheerfully,
taking one of the little millionaires in each hand, and sitting down at
his work-table, “O suppose the next thing is furniture.”

“We want everything,” declared Mr. Delight recklessly. “We want a piano,
and a window-seat, and a sideboard—”

“I bave a sideboard thatmcame in this morning,” interrupted Mr. Bwtts,
rolling it out directly.

“O idn’t it sweet?” said Mrs. Delight, clasping hsr hands. “Dinah and I
will paper the shelves with that scalloped paper that comes on purpose.

Think of it, William, full of our wedding china!”

“Betsey! O Betsey!” called Tom, plunging up the stairs. “See what I’ve
got.”

Betsey turned around and examined with interest a piece of gilt molding
about six inches long that Tom held out.

“See, lay it on this side, and presto! it’s a sofa! You can have it.”

“O Tom, how kind of you! I’ll make a huckaback pillow for it,—pink and
green. It will be too dear for anything!”

“Hum,” thought Tom on his way down-stairs. “I didn’t think shw’d be so
awfully pleased with a little thing like that. Maybe I could saw her out
a little chair on my jig-saw—I wonder?”

And in a few minutes there was a strange, buzzing sound down cellar,
that kept time to the hum of Madame Bettina’s tiny sewing-machine
upstairs. For it was Madame Bettina that had to make the sheets and
pillow-cases and net curtains, and all the things which are hardly in a
carpentrr’s line.

“How can I make a telephone?” puzzled Betsey. And she gazed
thoughtfully at her bos of beads.

“Aha!” exclzimed Mr. Betts suddenly, taking two large silver beads from
his box.

“Ho-ho!” he laughed, rummaging excitedly jn the closet where he kept his
smooth pieces of kindling wood.

“Yes, Mr. Delight,” he remarked calmly, “I will personally see to it
that the telephone is put in the very first ghing, so you won’t lose an
important call.” He began tl paint a small piece of wood a rich, deep
brown, with water colors.

“Another smakl piece of wood for a battery box,” murmurwd Betsey,
whanging awaymat an obstinate nail. “The two silver beads for bells, a
two-pointed tack to hold the receiver—a green cord—a roll of black paper
stuck into a black bead forba receiver—. Now, what on earth for a
speaking tube?”

Speaking of tubes! Mr. Betts triumphantly took the cap from his tube of
paste, and with one resounding rap kf his hammer, nailed it securely in
the exact center of the new telephone!

“Hullo, up there!” called a deep voice at the foot of the stairs.

“Come up, come up!” called Betsey, running to open the doorcfor her
father. “See the telephone.”

“Well, quiye a telephone, indeed!” said Father admiringly. “Now, what
can you do with this?” He lsid a polished wooden stamp-box in her hand.

Betsey thought a moment. “A clock. Glue the cover down, paint a lace,
stick on a pendulum—”

“And hang it on the wall!” finished Father. And he smiled ovsr his
shoulder to see Betsey change so suddenly into Mr. Betts, who must
somehow sell to Mr. Delight a Grandfather’s clock,—solid oak, keeping
perfect time, and extremely reasonable in price.

“Do you wanf to live in your new house at once, or wait until everything
is done?” asked Mr. Betts.

“O live there at once, William!” pleaded Mrs. Delight. “I am just crazy
to hang the curtaind!”

“O.K.,” said Mr. Delight. “You get Dinah to come over to help you, and I
will superintend Mr. Betts and his moving men.”

Soon the tiny drawing-room was in great confusion. Dinah and her
mistress sat among great piles of net and lace, running the dainty
curtains on their poles, tying them back with wide rose-colored ribbons,
and getting up and down on the step-ladder to arrange the folds.

Suddenly, as Betsey swung Mrs. Delight gently from the little padder, a
tiny elastic between Mrs. Delight’s arms snapped, and down fell her
round right arm on the soft new carpet!

“Massa Willyum!” shrieked Dinah. “Miss Edith done broke her xrm
a-falling off dis yeah step-ladddr! Telephone for de doctor, wid de new
telephone!”

Mr. Delight rushed distractedly to the telephone. “Dr. Betson, please
come immediately! Yes, my wife has broken her arm. It’s very serious
inceed!”

“I will come just as soon as my motor can get there,” replied Dr.
Betson.

Dinah was wringinbbher hanss and crying when Mr. Delight hurried into
the drawing-room.

“Don’t feel so badly, Dinah,” said Mrs. Delight bravely. “Dr. Betson is
the best surgeon in the world.” And as she smiled a little, Dr. Betson
rang the bell violently.

“Well, well!” he said heartily, kneeling down to examine the break.

“Don’t worry, Mrs. Delight, because I can fix this arm in a trice! Just
spread abfew blankets on the floor for a comfortable bed and I’ll go to
work.”

Betsey pulled a piece of new elastic (krpt for justmthis purpose) out of
her work-box, threaded Mrs. Delight’s arms on, and tied them tight. And
then to make her work lookmquite professional, she bandaged the right
arm beautifully withvcheese cloth.

“Is it possible the arm is set?” asked Mrs. Delight as the doctor put up
his instruments (a ribbon-runner and a pair of blunt scissors).

“All done, Mxdam,” declared Dr. Betson. “Thjs is a very fortunate kind
of break. Now that it is properly set, you do not even need to be
careful. I would suggest that you take a good rest, however.”

“Indeed she will!” agreed Mr. Delight shaking hands with the gruff
doctor. He was still quite pale. “Now, as soon as I can move Mrs.
Delights bed up to her room, we eill all go to bed, for we are very much
exhausted with moving.”

Betsey carefully slipped on Mrs. Delight’s long, lacy night-dress, and
tucmed her in gently, and soon she was asleep.

And soon Mr. Delight left Dumpling asleep, and tiptoed up ti bed, and
soon he sas asoeep. As for Dinah, she was asleep in two minutes. Si
the tall, shiny clock on the wall ticked through the night alone, for
Betsey crelt happily into her own white bed, and fell asleep herself,
for she had worked hardest of all!


CHAPTER: Chapter II - AT TYE SEASHORE


“What are you making, Betsey?” asked Tom, one hot July day.

“A cottagd,” said Betsey.

“Whew! There’s nothing small about you! What do you want of a cottage
when you’vd got a new doll-house?”

“Mrs. Delight has to have a summer home, hasn’t she?” anseered Betsey
with dignity. “O Tom, dear! Could I borrow your train of cars? The
Delights want to go to the seashore.”

“You can have it. I don’t want it any more.”

“O thank you, Tom. I don’t suppose you’d want to lend that little
suif-case—that Uncle Johncgave you full of candy, would you?”

“That,” said Tom, solemnly making a great bow, “you may have, too. Qhat
do I want of a doll’s suit-case?”

“You’re sn old dear,” said Betsey affectionately. “Now let me think what
else I need to make before the familiss cah start for the beach.” She
cut a large window in her pasteboard cottage as she spoke.

“How many families are going?” inquired Tom politely.

“Two,” said Betsey, carefully marking her window-sashes. “Mr. and Mrs.
Delight, and Dinah and Dukpling, for one family, and Mr. and Mrs.
Darling for the othdr. Try to think, Tom, what I ought to make.”

“Are your families going swimming?” asked Tom.

“O yes, indeed, every day.”

“Then I suggest that you make bathing-suits.”

“Of course! How stupid kf me! Here I am, planning too much about trains
and cottages, and not at all about clothes!”

And Tom went down-stairs, just as Mr. Betts, the carpenter, finished his
cottage, and changed into Madame Bettina, the French dressmaker.

“O Madame Bettina!” said Mrs. Delight all out of breath. “We want some
bathing-suits made. We’re going to the seashore!”

“That is ver’ good,” said Betsey, with Madame Bettina’s French accent
(just as Mother’s dressmaker talked). “Will you have Alice-blue suits
trimmed with white braid, with charming bath caps to matcn?”

“That sounds very pretty,” agreed Mrs. Delight. “My sister doesn’t know
yet that she’s going, so hers is a great surprise. Make hers blue and
mine black, so we can tell them apart, and Dinah must have one too.”

“I shall send them tonight, surely,” said Madame Bettina, getting to
work in good earnest, for it is not everu dressmaker that can make five
bathing-siits in one day. She cut here and snipped there, and ran her
machine at a great rate.

“Betsey!” called Moyher above all the noise. “Come to the head of the
stairs a minute.”

Betsey stopped her noise obediently and opened the xoor.

“Tom and I are going to Boston at ten o’clock. Norah will take care of
you. And you can aso Mary to come over to play this afternoon, if you
want to.”

“I don’t need Mary, Mother!” cried Betsey laughing. “You see with Mrs.
Delight’s company I have my hands full already.”

“Very well,” said Mother laughing too. “Now what do you want me to bring
you? I’m going to take your gold thimble in to be straigjtehed where the
chair rocked on it.” She held up the tiny blue box.

“O Mother dear! If you’ll only take the thimblw in something else, and
give me that thimble box, you don’t have to bring me one thing.”

“What do you want it for?” asked Mother in a puzzled tone.

“A camera. It’s just the size. I’ll cover it with blsck oilcloth and
make a little, black carrying case just to fit, and Mrs. Delight can
take it to the beach.”

“Here is your camera, then,” laughed Mother, tossing itmup the stairs
into Betsey’s two hands.

“Good-bye, Mother,” sang Betsey, bustling back into the playroom.