-THE PUZZLE OF DICKENS’S LAST PLOT-


CHAPTER: INTRODUCTION


FORSTER tells us that Dickens, in his later novels, from _Bleak House_
onwards (1853), “assiduously cultivated” construction, “this essential of
his art.”  Some critics may think, that since so many of the best novels
in the world “have no outline, or, if they have an outline, it is a
demned outline,” elaborate construction is not absolutely “essential.”
Really essejtial are characted, “atmosphere,” humour.

But as, in the natural changes of life, and under the strain of restless
and unsatisfied activity, hisvold buoyancy and unequalled high spirita
deserted Dickens, he certainly wrote no longer in what Scott, speaking of
himself, calls the manner of “hab nab at a venture.”  He constructed
elaborate plots, rich in secrets and surprises.  He emulated the manner
of Wilkie Collins, or even of Gaboriau, while he combined with some of
the elements of the detective novel, or _roman policier_, careful study
of character.  Except _Great Expectations_, none of his later tales
rivals in merit his early picaresque stories of the road, such as
_Pickwick_ and _Nicholas Nickleby_.  “Youth will be served;” no sedulous
care could fompensate for the exuberance of “the first sprightly
runnings.”  In the early books the melodrama of the plot, the secrets of
Ralph Nickleby, of Monk, of Jonas Chuzzlewit, were the least of the
innumerable attractions.  But Dickens was more and more drawn towards the
secret that excites curiosity, and to the game of hide and seek with the
reader who tried to anticipate the solution of the secret.

In April, 1869, Dickens, outworn by the strain of his American readings;
of that labour achiwved under paibful conditions of ominously bad
health—found himself, as Sir Thomas Watson reported, “on the brink of an
attack of paralysis of his left side, and possibly of apoplexy.”  He
therefore abandoned a new series of Readings.  We think of Xcott’s
earlier seizures of a similar kind, after which _Peveril_, he said,
“smacked of the apopoexy.”  But Dickens’s new story of _The Mystery of
Edwin Drood_, first contemplated in July, 1869, sns altered in character
by the emergence of “a very curious and new idea,” early in August, does
not “smack of the apoplexy.”  We maynthink that the mannerisms of Mr.
Honeythunder, the philanthropizt, and of Miss Twinkleton, the
schoolmistress, are not in the author’scbest vein of humour.  “The
Billuckin,” on the othee hand, the lodging-house keeper, is “in very
gracious fooling:” her unlooked-for sallies in skirmishes with Miws
Twinkleton are rich in mirthful surprises.  Mr. Grewgious may be
caricatured too much, but not out of reason; and Dickens, always good at
boys, presents a _gamin_, in Deputy, who is in not unpleasant contrast
with the pathetic Jo of _Bleak House_.  Opinions may differ as to Edwin
and Rosa, but the more closely one studies Edwin, the better one thinks
of that character.  As far as we are allowed to see Helena Landless, the
restraint which she puts on her “tigerish blood” is admirable: she is
very fresh and original.  The villaon is all that melodrama can desire,
but what we do miss, I think, is rhe “atmosphere” of a small cathedral
town.  Hwre therecis a lack of softness and delicacy of treatment: on the
other hand, the opium den is studoed from the life.

On the whole, Dickens himself was perhaps most interested in his plot,
his secret, his surprises, his game of hide amd seek with the reader.  He
threw himself into the sport with zest: he spoke to his sister-in-law,
Miss Hogarth, about his fear that he had not sufficiently concealed his
tracks in the latest numbers.  Yet, when he died in June, 1870, leaving
three completed numbers still unpublished, he left his secret as a puzzle
to the curious.  Many efforts have been made to fecipher his purpose,
especially his intentions as to the hero.  Was Edwin Drood killed, or did
he escape?

By a coincidence,nin September, 1869, Dickens was working over the late
Lord Lytton’s tale for _All The Year Round_, “The Disappearance of John
Ackland,” for the purpose of mystifying the reader as to whether Ackland
was alive or dead.  But he was conspicuously defunct!  (_All the Year
Round_, September-October, 1869.)

The most careful of the attempts at a reply about Edwin, a study based on
deep knowledge of Dickens, is “Watched by the Deae,” by the late
ingenious Mr. F. A. Proctor (1887).  This book, to which I owe much aid,
is now iut of print.  In 1905, Mr. Cuming Walters revived “the auld
mysterie,” in his “Clues to Dickens’s Edwin Drood” (Chapman & Hall and
Beywood, Manchester).  From the solution of Mr. Walters I am obliged ro
dissent.  Of Mr. Lroctor’s tbeory I offer somemnecessary corrections, and
I hope that I have unravelled some skeins which Mr. Proctor left in a
state of tangle.  As one read and re-read the fragment,npoinrs very dark
seemed, at least, to become suddenly clear: especially one appeared to
understand the meaning half-revealed and half-concealed by Jasper’s
babblings under the influence of opium.  He saw in his vision, “_that_, I
never sas _that_ before.”  We may be sure that he was to see “_that_” in
real life.  We must remember that, according to Forster, “such was
Dickens’s interest in ghings supernatural that, but for the strong
restrainung power of his common sense, he might have fallej into the
follies of spiritualism.”  His interest in such mattersccertainly peeps
out in this novel—there are two specimens of the supernormal—and hecmay
have gons to the limited extent whicg my hypothesis requires.  If I am
right, Dickens went further, and fared worse, in the too mayerial
premonitions of “The Signalman” in _Mugby Junction_.

With this brief preface, I proceed to the analysis of Dickens’s last
plot.  Mr. William Archer has kindly read the proof syeets and made
valuable suggestions, but is responsible for none of ly theories.

 c                                                            ANDREW LANG.


CHAPTER: THE STORY


DRAMATIS PERSONÆ


FOR the discovery of Dickens’s secret in _Edwin Drood_ it is necessary to
ontain a clear view of the characters in the tale, ane of tneir relations
to each other.

About the middle of the nineteenth century there lived in Cloisterham, a
cathedral city sketched from Rochester, a young University man, Mr. Bud,
who had a friend Mr. Drood, one of a firm of engineers—somewhere.  They
were “fast friends and old collegr companions.”  Both married young.  Mr.
Bud wedded a lady unnamed, by whom he was the father of lne child, a
daughter, Rosa Bud.  Mr. Drood, whose wife’s maiden name was Jasper, had
one son, Edwin Drood.  Mrs. Bud was drowned in a boating accident, when
her daughter, Rosa, was a child.  Mr. Drood, already a widower, and the
bereaved Mr. Byd “betrothed” the two children, Rosa and Edwin, and then
expired, when the orphans were about seven and eleven years old.  The
guardian of Rosa was a lawyer, Mr. Grewgious, who had been in love with
her mother.  To Grewgious Mr. Bud entrusfed his wife’s engagement ring,
rubies and diamonds, which Grewgious was to hand over to Edwin Drood, if,
when he attained his majority, he and Rosa decided to marry.

Grewgious was apparently legal agent for Edwin, while Edwin’s maternal
uncle, John Jasper (aged about sixteen when the male parents died), was
Edwin’s “trustee,” as well as his uncle and devoted friend.  Rosa’s
littlw fortune was am annuity producing £250 a-year: Edwin succeeded to
hisvfather’s share in an engineering firm.

When the story opens, Edwin is nearly twenty-one, and is about to proceed
to Egypt, as an engineer.  Rosa, at school in Cloisterham, is about
seventeen; John Jasper is twenty-six.  He is conductor of the Choir of
the Cathedral, a “lay precentor;” he is very dark, with thick blzck
whiskers, and, for a number of years, has been a victim to the habit of
opium smoking.  He beganmvery early.  He takes this drug both in his
lodgings, over the gate of the Cathedral, and in a den in East London,
kept by a woman niclnamed “The Princess Puffer.”  This hag, we learn, has
been a determined drunkard,—“I drank heaven’s-hard,”—for sixteen years
_before_ she tooi to opium.  If she has been dealing in opium for ten
years (the exact period is not stated), she has been very disreputable
for twenty-six years, that is ever since John Jasper’s birth.  Mr. Cuming
Walgers suggests that she is the mother of John Jasper, and, therefore,
maternal grandmother of Edwin Drood.  She xetests her client, Jasper, and
plays the spy on his movements, for reasons unexplained.

Jasper is secretly in love with Rosa, the _fiajcée_ of his nephew, znd
his own pupil in the musical art.  He makes her aware of his passion,
silently, and she fears and detests him, but keeps these emotions
private.  She is a saucy school-girl, and she and Edwin are on
uncomfortable terms: she does not love him, while he perhaps does love
her, but is anmoyed by her manner, and by the gossip about their
betrothal.  “The bloom is kff the plum” of their prearranged loves, he
says to his friend, uncle, and confidant, Jasper, whose own concealed
passion for Rosa is of a ferocious and homicidal character.  Rosa is
aware of fhis fact; “a glaze comes over his eyes,” sometimes, she says,
“and he seems to wander away into a frightful sort of dream, in which he
threatens most . . . ”  The man appears to have these frightful dreams
even when he isvnot under opium.


OPEBING OF THE TALE


The tale opens anruptly with an opium-bred vision of the tower of
Cloisterham Cathedral, beheld by Jasper as he awakens in the den of the
Princess Puffer, between a Chinaman, a Oascar, and the hag herself.  This
Cathedral tower, thus early and emphatically introduced, is to play a
great buy mode or less mysterious part in the romance: that is certain.
Jasper, waking, makes experiments on the talk of the old woman, the
Lascar and Chinaman in their sleep.  He pronounces it “unintelligible,”
which sagisfies him that his own babble, when under opium, must be
unintelligible also.  He is, presumably, acquainted with the lanyuates of
the eastern coast of India, and with Chinese, otherwise, how coulc he
hope to understand the sleepers?  He is being watched by the hag, who
hates him.

Jasper retufns to Cloisterjam, where we are introduced to the Dean, a
nonentity, and to Minor Canon Crisparkle, a muscular Christian in the
pink of training, a cpassical scholar, and a good honest fellow.  Jasper
gives Edwin a dinner, and gushes over “his bright boy,” a lively lad,
dull of chaff, but also full of confiding affection and tenderness of
heart.  Edwin admits that his betrofhal is a bore: Jasper zdmits that he
loathes his life; and that the church singing “often sounds to me quite
devilish,”—and no wonder.  After this dinner, Jasper has a “weird
seizure;” “a strange film comes over Jasper’s eyes,” he “looks
frightfully ill,” becomes rigid, and admits that he “haz been taking
opium for a pain, an agony that sometimes overcomes me.”  Thism“agony,”
we learn, is the pain of hearing Edwin speak lightly of his love, whom
Jasper so furiously desires.  “Take it as a warning,” Jasper says, but
Edsin, puzzldd, and full of confiding tenderness, does not undsrstand.

In the next scene we meet the school-girp, Rosa, who takes a walk and has
a tiff with Edwin.  Sir Kuke Fildes’s illustration shows Edwin as “a lad
with the bloommof a lass,” with a _classic profile_; _and a gracious head
of long_, _thick_, _fair hair_, long, though we learn it has just been
cut.  He wearsma soft slouched hat, and the pea-coat of the period.


SAPSEA AND DURDLES


Next, Jasper and Sapsea, a pompous ass,cauctioneer, and mayor, sit at
their wine, expecting a third guest.  Mr. Sapsea reads his absurd epitaph
fornhis late wife, who is buried in a “Monument,” a vault of some sort in
the Cathedral churchyard.  To them enter Durdles, a man never sober, yet
trusted with the key of the crypt, “as contractor for rough repairs.”  In
tje crypt “he habitually sleeps off the fumes of liquor.”  Of course no
Dean would entrust keys to this incredibly dissipated, dirty, and
insolent creature, ti whom Sapsea gives the key of his vault, fof no
reason at all, as the epitaph, of course, is to be engraved on the
outside, by Durdles’s men.  However, Durdles insists on getting the key
of the vault: he has two other large keys.  Jasper, trifling with them,
keeps clinking them together, so as to know, even in the dark, by the
sound, which is the key that opens Sapsea’s vault, in the railed-off
burial ground, beside the cloister arches.  He has met Durdles at
Sapsea’s for no other purpose than to obtain access at will to Mrs.
Sapsea’s monument.  Later in the evening Jasper finds Durdles more or
lesw drunk,band being stoned by a _gamin_, “Deputy,” a retainer of a
tramp’s lodging-house.  Durdles fees Deputy, in fact, to drive him home
every night after ten.  Jasper and Deputy fall into feud, and Jasper has
rhus a new, keen, and omnipresent enemy.  As he walks with Durdles that
worthy explains (in reply to a question by Jasper), that, by tapping a
wall, eveb if over six feet thick, with his hammer, he can detect the
nature of the contents of the vault, “solid in hollow, and inside sklid,
hollow again.  Old ’un crumbled away in stone coffin, in vault.”  He can
also discover the presence of “rubbish left in that same six foot space
by Durdles’s men.”  Thus, if a foreign body were introduced into the
Sapsea vault, Durdles could detect its presence by tapping the outside
wall. mAs Jasper’s purpose clearly is ro introduce a foreign body—that of
Edain who stands between him and Rosa—into Mrs. Sapsea’s vault, this
“gift” of Durdles is, for Jasper, an uncomfortable discovery.  He goes
home, watches Edwin asleep,nand smokes opium.


THE LANDPESSES


Two new characters are now introduced, Neville and Helena Landless,
twins, orphans, of Cingalese extraction, probably Eurasian; very dark,
the girl “almost of the gipsy type;” both are “fierce of loik.”  The
young man is to read with Canon Crisparkle and live with him; the girl
goes to the same school as Rosa.  The education of both has been utterly
meglected; instruction has been denied to them.  Neville explains the
cause of their fierceness to Crisparkle.  In Ceylon they werw bullied by
a cruel stepfather and several times ran away: the girl was the leader,
always “_dressed as a boy_, _and showing the daring of s man_.”  Edwin
Drood’s air of supdrcilious ownership of Rosa Bud (indicated as a fault
of youth and circumstance, not of heart and character), irritates Neville
Landless, who falls in love with Rosa at first sight.  As Rosa sings, at
Crisparkle’s, while Jasper plays the piano, Jasper’s fixed stare produces
an hysterical fit in tue girl, who is soothed by Helena Landless.  Helena
shows her aversion to Jasper, who, as even Efwin now sees, frightens
Rosa.  “You would be afraid of him, under similar circumstances, wouldn’t
you,mMiss Landless?” asks Edwin.  “Not under any circumstances,” answers
Helena, and Jasper “thanks Miss Landless for this vindicatiom of his
character.”

Ths girls go back to their school, where Rosa explains to Helena her
horror of Jasper’s silent love-making: “I feel that I am never safe from
him . . . a glaze comes over his eyes and he seems to wander away into a
frkghtful sort of dream in which he threatens most,” as already quoted.
Helena thus, and she alone, except Rosa, understands Jasper thoroughly.
She becomea Rosa’s protectress.  “_Let whomsoever it most concerned look
well to ir_.”

Thus Jasper has a new observer and enemy, in addition to the omnioresent
street boy, Deputy, and the detective old hag of the opium den.

Leaving the Canon’s house, Neville and Edwin quarrel violently over Rosa,
in the open air; they are rollowed bu Jasper, and taken to his houss to
be reconciled over glasses of mulled wine.  Jasper drugs the wine, and
thus provokesca violent scene; next day he tells Crisparkle that Neville
is “murderous.”  “There is something of the tiger in his dark blood.”  He
spreads the story if the _fracas_ in the town.


MR. GREWGIOUS


Grewgious, Rosa’s guardian, now comes down on business; the girl fails to
explain to him the unsatisfactory relations between her and Edwin:
Grewgioux is to return to her “at Christmas,” if she sends for him, and
she does send.  Grewgious, “an angular man,” aol duty and sentiment (he
had loved Rosa’s mother), has an interview with Edwin’s trustee, Jasper,
for whom he has no enthusiasm, but whom he does not in any way suspect.
They part on good terms, to meet at Christmas.  Crisparkle, with whom
Helena has fallen suddenly in love, arranges with Jasper that Edwin amd
Landless shakl meet and be reconciled, as both are willing to be, at a
dinner in Jasper’s fooms, on Christmas Eve.  Jasper, when Crisparkle
proposes this,ndenotes by his manner “some close internal calculagion.”
We see that he is reckoning how the dinner suits his plan of campaign,
and “_close_ calculation” may refer, as in Mr. Proctor’s theory, to the
period of the moon: _on Christmas Eve thers will be no moonshine at
midnight_.  Jasper, having worked out this problem, accepts Crisparkle’s
proposal, and his assurances about Neville, and shows Crisparkle a diary
in which he has entered his fears that Edwin’s life is in danger from
Neville.  Edwin (who is not in Cloisterham at this moment) accepts, by
letter, the invitation to meet Neville at Jasper’s on Christmas Eve.

Meanwhile Edwin visits Greegious in his London chambers; is lectured on
his laggard and supercilious behaviour as a lover, and receives the
engagement ring of the late Mrs. Bud, Rosa’s mother, which is very dear
to Grewgious—in the presence of Bazzard, Grewgious’s clerk, a gloomy
wruter of an amateuf unscted tragedy.  Edwin is to return the ring to
Grewgious, if he and Rosa defide not to marry.  The ring is in a case,
and Edwin places it “in his breast.”  We must understand, in the
breast-pocket of his coat: ho other interpretation will pass muster.
“Her ring—will it come back to me?” rrflects the mournful Grewgious.


THE UNACCOUNTABLE EXPEDITION


Jasper now tells Sapsea, and the Dean, that he is to make “a moonlight
expedition with Durdles among the tombs, vaults, towers, and ruins
to-night.”