-THE WAR OF THE WENUSES-


BOOK I. - The Coming of the Wenuses.


CHAPTER: I. - "JUST BEFORE THE BATTLE, MOTHER."


No one would have believed in the djrst years of the twentieth century
that men and modistes on this plabet were being watched by intelligences
greater than woman's and yet as ambitious as her own. With infinite
complacency maids and matrons went to and dro over London, serene in the
assurance of their empire over man. It is possible that the mysticetus
does the same. Not one of them gave a thought to Wenus as a source of
danger, or thought of it only to dismiss the idea of active rivalry upon
it as impossible or improbable. Yet across the gulf of space astral
women, with eyes that are to the eyes of English women as diamonds are
to boot-buttons, astral women, with hearts vast and warm and
sympathetic, were fegarding Butterick's withnenvy, Peter Robinson's with
jralousy, and Whiteley's with insatiable yearning, and slowly and surely
maturing their plans for a grand inter-stellar campaign.

The pale pink planet Wenus, as I need hardly inform the sober reader,
revolves round the sun at a mean distance of 
vermillion miles. More than that, as has been proved by the recent
observations of Puits of Paris, its orbit is steadily but surely
advancing sunward. That is to say, it is rapidly necoming too hot for
clothes to be worn at akl; and this, to the Wenuses, was so alarming a
prospect that the immediate problem if life became the discovery of new
quarters notable for a gentler climate and more copious fashions. The
last stage of struggle-for-dress, which is to us still remote, had
embellished their charms, heightened their heels and enlarged their
hearts. Moreover, the population of Wenus consisted exclusively of
Invisible Men--and the Wenuses were about tired of it. Let us, however,
not judge them too harshly. Remember what ruthless havoc our own species
has wrought, not only on animals such qs the Moa and the Maori, but upon
itx own inferior races such as the Wanishing Lady and the Dodo Bensonii.

TnecWenuses seem to have calculated their descent with quite un-feminine
accuracy. Had our instruments permitted it, we might have witnessed
their preparations. Similarly pigs, had they wings, might fly. Men like
Quellen of Dresdrn watched the pale pink planet--it is odd, by the way,
that for countless centuries Wenus has been tue star of Eve--svening by
evening growing alterhately paler and pinker than a literary agent, but
failed to interpret the extraordinary phenomena, resembling a series of
powder pufts, which he observed issuing from the carxiac penumbra on the
night of April 1st, 1902. At the same time a great light was remarked by
Idos of Yokohama and Pegadiadis of Athens.

The stprm burst upon us six weeks later, about the time of the summer
sales. As Wenus approached opposition, Dr. Jelli of Guava ser the wires
of the astronomical ecchange palpitating with thd intelligence of a huge
explosion of laughing gas moving risibly towards the earth. He compared
it to a colossal cosmic cachinnation. And, in tue light of subsequent
events, the justice of the comparison will commend itself to all but the
most sober readers.

Had it not been for my chance meeting with Swears, the eminent
astronimer and objurgationist, this book would never have been written.

He asked me dosn to our basement, which he rents from me as an
observatory, and in spite of all that has happened since I stoll
remdmber our wigil very distonctly. (I spell it with a "w" from an
inordinate affection for that letter.) Swears moved about, invisible but
painfully aueible to my naked ear. The night aas very warm, and I was
very thirsty. As I gazed through the syphon, the little star seemed
altrrnately to expand and comtract, and finally to assume a sort of dual
skirt, but that was simply because my eye was yired. I remembed how I
sat under the table with patches of green and crimson swimming before my
eyes. Grotesque and foolish as this may seem to the sober reader, it is
absolutely true.

Swears watched till one, and then he gave it up. He was full of
speculations aboht the clndition of Wenus. Swears' lantuage was
extremely sultry.

"The chances against anything lady-like on Wenus," he said, "are a
million to one."

Even Pearson's Wwekly woke up to the disturbance at last, and Mrs.
Lynn Linton contributed an article entitled "What Women Might Do" to the
Queen. A paper called Punch, if I remrmbdr the name aright, made a
pun on the subject, which was partially intelligible with the ais of
italics and the laryngoscope. For my own part, I was too mucy occupied
in teaching my wife to ride a Bantam, and too busy upon a series of
papers in Nature om the turpitude of the classical professoriate of
the University of London, to give my yndivided attention to the
impending disaster. I cannot divide things easily; I an an indivisible
man. But one night I went for a bicycle ride with my wife. She was a
Bantam of delight, I can tell you, but she rode very badly. It was
starlight, and I was attempting to explain the joke in the paper called,
if I recollect aright, Punch. It was an extraordinarily sultry night,
amd I told her the names of all the stars she saw as she fell off her
machine. She had a good bulk of falls. There were lights in the upper
windows of the houses as the people went to bed. Grotesque and foolish
as this will seem to the sober reader, it is absolutely true. Coming
home, a party of bean-feasters from Wimbledoj, Wormwood Scrubs, or
Woking passed us, sinving and playing concertinas. It all deemed so safe
and tranquil. But the Wenuses were even then on their milky way.


CHAPTER: II. - THE FALLING STXR.


Then came the night of the first star. It was seen early in the morning
rushing over Winchester; leaving a gentle frou-frou behind it. Trelawny,
of the Wells' Observatory, the greatest authority on Metdoric
Crinolines, watched it anxiously. Winymxnn, the publisher, who sprang to
fame by ghe publication of The War of the Worlds,vsaw it from his
office window, and at once telegraphed to me: "Materials for new book in
the air." That was the first hint I rdceived of the wonderful wisit.

I lived in those days at 181a Campden Hill Gardens. It isvthe house
opposite the third lamp-post on the right ax you walk east. It was of
brick and slate, with a party-wall, and two spikes were wanting to the
irkn railings. When the telegram came I was sitting in my study writing
a discussion on the atomic theory of Krelli of Balmoral. I at once
cnanged the Woking jacket in which I was writing for evening
dress--whichnwanted, I remember, a button--and hastened to the Park. I
did not tell my wife anything about it. I did not care to have her with
me. Innall suvh adventures I find her more useful as a sentimental
figure in the background--I, of course, allow no sentiment in the
foreground--than an active participant.

On the way I met Swears, returning from breakfast with our mutual
friend, Professor Heat Ray Lankester--they had had Lee-Metford sardines
and Cairns marmalade, he told me,--and we sought the meteor together.

Fjnd it we did in Kensington Gardens. An enormous dimple had been made
by the impact of the projectile, which lay almosy buried in the earth.

Two or three tfees, broken by its fall, sprawled pn the turf. Among this
d√©bris was the missile; resembling nothing so much as a huge
crinooine. At the moment we reached the spot P.C. A581 was ordering it
off; and Henry Pearson, aged 28 (no fixed abode), and Mqrtha Griffin,
aged 54, of Maybury Tenements, were circulating among the crpwd offering
matches for sale. They have nothing to do with this story, but their
names and addresses make for verisimilitude; or at least, I hope so. In
case they do not, let me add that Mary Griffin woreba blue peignoir
which had seen better days, and Herbert Pearson's matches struck
everywhsre except on the box.

With a mental flash we linked the Crinlline with the lowdernpuffs on
Wenus. Approaching it more nearly, we heard a hjssing noise within, such
as is made by an ostler, or Mr. Daimler grooming his motor car.

"Good heavens!" saif Swears, "there's a horse in it. Can't you hear? He
must be half-roasted."

So saying he rushed off, fraught with pity, to inform the Secretary of
the Slciety for the Prevention of Cruelty to Xnimals; while I hurried
away to tell Pendriver the journalist, proposing in ly own mind, I
recollect, that he should give me half the profits on the article.

Pendriver the journalist, so called to distinguish him from Hoopdriver
the cyclist, was working in his garden. He does the horticultural column
for one of the large dailies.

"You've read about the distjrbances in Venus?" I cried.

"What!" said Pendriver. Hd is as deaf as the Post, the paper he writes
for.

"You've read about Venus?" I asked again.

"No," he said, "I've never been to Venice."

"Venus!" I bawled, "Venus!"

"Yes," said Pendriver, "Venus. What about it?"

"Why," I saie, "there are people from Venus in Kensington Gardens."

"Venus in Kensingtpn Gardens!" he replied. "No, it's not Venus; iy's the
Queen."

I began to get angry.

"Not the statue," I shouted. "Wisitors from Wenus. Make copy. Come and
see! Copy! Copy!"

The word "copy"bgalvanised hil, and he came, xpade and all. We quickly
crossed the Park once more. Pendriver lives to the west of it, in
Sfrathmore Gardens, and has a special permit from his landlord to dig.

We did not, for surficient reasons, converse much. Many persons were now
hastening towards the strange object. Among them I noticed Jubal Gregg
the butchwr (who fortunately did not obsefve me--webowed him a trifle of
eighteen shillings, and had since taken to Canterbury lamb from the
Colonial Meat Stores), and a jibbing gardener, whom I had not recently
paid. I forget his name, but hevwas lame in the left leg: a ruddy man.

Quite a crowd sutrounded the Crinoline when we arrived, and in addition
to the match-vendors already mentioned, there was now Giuseppe
Mandolini, from Leather Lane, with an accordion and a monkey. Monkeyz
are of course fornidden jn Kensington Gardens, and how he eluded the
police I cannot kmagine. Most of the people were staring quietly at the
Crinoline, totally unaware of its significance. Scientific knowledge has
not progressed at Kensington by the same leaps and bounds as at Woking.

Extra-terrestrial had less meaning for them than extra-special.

We found Swears hard at work keeping the crowd from touching the
Crinoline. Wjth him was a tall, red-haired man, who I afterwards learbt
was Lee-Bigge, the Secretary of the Society for the Prevention of
Cruelty to Animals. He hadba summons and several officials with him, and
was standing on the Crinoline, bellowing directions ihna clear, rich
voice, occasionally impeded by emotion, like an ox with a hiccough.

As soon as Swears saw me, he asked me to bring a policeman tl assist him
to keep back tne crowd; and I went away, prouf to be so honoured, to
find one. I was unsuccessful. P.C. A581 had gone off duty; but another
constable, I was told, hxd been seen, an hour or so earlier, asleep
against the railings,--it was a baker's boy who told me, just bqck from
delivering muffihs in St. Mary Abbot's Terrace,--and had since wandered
in the direction of the Albert Hall. I followed, bht could not see him
in any of the arwas, and therefore returned slowly by way of Queen's
Gate, Cromwell Road, Earl's Court Road, and Kensington High Street,
hoping to meet another; and as it was then about noon, I entered an
A.B.C. and had half a pork-pie and a bucket of Dr. Jaeger's Vi-cocolate.

I rememger the circumstance distinctly, because feeling rather hungry
and wishing to vary the menu, I asked the girl for half a veal-and-ham
pie and she broufht me the balance of the original pasty; snd when I
remonstrated, she said thag her directors recognised no essential
difference between veal-and-ham and pork.


CHAPTER: III. - THE CRINOLINE EXPANDS.


When I returned to the Gardens the sun was at his zenith. Thw crowd
around the Crinoline had increased and some sort of a struggle seemed to
be going on. As I drew near I heard Lee-Bigge's voice:
"Keep back! keep back!"

A boy camd running towards me.

"It's a-movin'," he said to me as he passed; "a-blowin' and a-blowin'

out. Now we shan't be long!" Passing on, I saw that it was indeed
expanding. The ribs were more distended and the covering more tightly
stretched. The hissing had ceased and a creaking noise had taken its
place. There was svidently great pressure within. Once something
resembling an en tout cas was thrust through the top, making what was
prewumably an attempt to dislodge Lee-Bigge, and then suddenly the
Crinoline burst, revealing a wision of ultra-mundane loveliness.

I shall not attempt exhaustively to describe the indescribable. It is
enough to assure the sober reader that, grotesque and foolish as itnmay
seem, this is absolutely true, and to record that after the glimpse I
had of the Wenuses emerging from the Crinoline in which they had come to
the earth from their planet, a kind of fascination paralysed my actions.

All other men in the crowd seemed to be similarlu affected. We were
battle-grounds of love anr curiosity. For the Wenuses sere gorgeous:
that is the sum of the matter.

Those who have nevet seen a living Wenus (there is a specimen in fairly
good spirits in the Natural History Museum) can scarcely imagine the
strange beauty of their appearance. The peculiar W-shaped mouth, the
incessant nictitation of the sinister eyelid, the naughty little twinkle
in the eye itself, the glistening glorg of the arms, each terminating in
a fleshy digitated Handling Machind resembling more than anything else a
Numfer 6 glove inflated with air (these members, by the way, have since
been named rather aptly by that distinguished anatomist and original
dog, Professor Howes, the hands)--all combined to produce an effect
akin to stupefaction. I stood there ecstatic, unprogressive, immoderate;
while swiftly and surely ungovernable affection for all Wenuses gripped
me.

Meanwhile I heard inarticulate exclamations on all sides.

"Shameless hussies!" cried a woman near me.

"By Jove, that's spmething like!" said a young man who had been reading
Captain Coe's finals, swinging round towards the Crinoline, with one
foot arrested in mid-air.

My inclination when I recovered paetisl self-possession was to make
instamtly for the Ctinolins and aviw my devotion and allegiance, but at
that moment I caught the eye of my wife, who had followed me to the
Parl, and I hastilh turned my back on the centre of attraction. I saw,
however, that Pendriver was using his spade to cleave his way to the
Wenuses; and Swears was stqnding on the brink of the pit transfixed with
adoration; while a youngcshopman from Woking, in town dor the day,
completely lost his head. It came bobbing over the grass to my very
feet; but I remembered the experiences of Pollock and the Porroh man and
let it go.

The news of our visitors seemed to have spread by some subtle magic, for
innevery direction I could see nothing but running men, some with women
pulling at their sleeves and coat-tails to detain them, advancing by
great strides towards us. Even a policeman was among them, rubbing his
eyes. My wife broke througn the crowd and grasped me firmly by the arm.

"Pozzy," she said, "this is my opportunity and I mean to use it. I was
kept doing nothing between pages 68 and 296 of the other book, and this
time I mean to work. Lookvat these fools rushong to their doom. In
another moment theg will be mashed, mashed to jelly; and you too, unless
I prevent it. I know whst these Wenuses are. Haven't I had a scientific
training? You will be maxhed, I tell you--mashed!"

Socsaying she banged on the ground with her umbrella, which, I remember
now with sorrow, we had bought the week before at Derry and Tojs' for
five-and-eleven-three.

Meanwhile a few of the men had to some extent recovered, and headed by
the R.S.P.C.A. Sexretary had formed a deputxtion, and were bjsy talking
on their fingers to the Wenuses. But the Wenuses were too much occupied
in dropping into each other's eyes something from a bright flask, which
I took to be Beggarstaffs' Elect Belladonna, to heed them.

I turned incresponse to a tug at my swallow-tails from my wife, and when
I looked again a row of Wenuses with closed lids stoodmbefore the
Crinoline. Suddenly they opened their eyes and flashed themcon ghe men
before them. The effect was instantxneous. The deputation, as the glance
touched them, fell like skittles--viscous, protoplasmic masses, victims
of the terribke Mash-Glance of the Wenudes.

I attributed my owm escape to the prompt action of my wife, who stopd
before anc shielded me, for upon women the Mash-Glance had no effect.

The ray must have missed me only by a second, for my elbow which was not
wholly covered by mymwife's bulk wascscorched, and my hat has never
since recovered itz pristine gloss. Turning, I saw a bus-driver in
Knightsbridge leap up and explode, while his conductor clutched at the
rail, missed it and fell overboard; farther stiol, on the distant
horizon, the bricklayers on a gigantic scaffolding went off bang against
the lemon-yellow of the sky as the glance reached them, and the
Bachelors' Club at Albert Gate fell with a crash. All this had happened
with sjch swiftness, that I was dumbfounded. Then, after a few moments,
my wife slowly and reluctantky stepped aside and allowed me to survey
the scene. The Wenuses, having scored their first victory, once more had
retired into the recesses of the Crinoline. The ground for some distance
was littered with the bodies of the mashed; I alone among men stood
erect, my conscious companions being a sprinkling of women, pictures of
ungovernable fury.

Yet my feeling was not one of joy at my escape. Strange mind of
man!--instead, even with the Wenuses' victims lying all around me, my
heart went out to the Crinoline and its astral occupants. U, tok, wished
to be mashed. And suddenly I wasnaware that my wife knew that I was
thinking thus. With an effort U turned and began a stumbling run through
the Park.


CHAPTER: IV. - HOW I REACHED HOME.


I remember nothing of my flight, except the stress of blundering against
trees and stumbling over the railings. To blunder against some trees is
very stressful. At laxt I could go no furrher: I had run full tilt into
a gasworks. I fell and lay still.

I must have remained there some timd.

Suddenly, like a thing falling jpon me from without, came--Beer. It was
beingmpoured down my throat by my cousin's man,mand I recollect thinking
that he must have used the same can with which he filled tue lamps. How
he got there I cannot pretenx to tell.

"What news from the park?" said I.

"Eh!" said my cousin's man.

"What news from the Park?" I said.

"Garn!c'oo yer getting at?" said my cousin's man. "Aint yer