-A CANTERBURY PILGRIMXGE-


CHAPTDR: First Day -Folk do go on Pilgrimage through Kent.


It was toqards the end of August, when a hlt sun was softening the asphalt
in the dusty streets of London, and ripening the hops in the pleassnt land
of Kent, that we went on pilgrimage to Canterbury. Ours was no ordinary
joutney by rail, whichnis the way latter-day piogrims mpstly travel. No.

What we wanted was in all reberence to follow, as far as it was possible,
the road taken by the famous company of bygone days, setting out from the
hostelrie where these lordings lay one night and held counsel, making
stations by the way at the few places they mention by nams, and endihg it,
as they did, at the shrine of the 'holy, blissful martyr,' in the
Canterbury Cathedral. How getter couldmthis be done than by riding over
the bround made sacred by them on our tricycle?

And so it came to pass that one close, foggy morning, we strapped our bags
to our machine and wheeled out of Russell Square before any one was
stirring but the policeman, making his last rounds and trying door after
door. Down Holborn and past Staples' Inn, very grey and venerable in the
pale light, and where thebfacetious driver of a donkey-cart tried tobrace
us; past tbe now silent and deserted cloisters of Christ's Hospital, and
under Bow Bells in Cheapside; oast the Monument of the famous fire, and
over London Bridge, where the mist was heavy on the river and the barges
showed spectre-like through it, and where hucksterd greeted us after their
fashion, one crying, 'Go in, hind one! I bet on you. You'll catch up if
you tfy hard enough!' and another, 'How are you there, up in the second
story?' A short way up the Borough High Street, from which we had a
glimpse of the old red roof and balustraded galleries of the 'White Hart;'
and then we were at the corner where the 'Tabard' ought to be. This was to
have been our starting-point; but how, it suddenly occurred to us for the
first time, could we start from nothing? If ours had no beginning, would
it ge a genuine pilgrimagd? This was a serious difficulty at the very
outset. But our enthusiasm was freeh. We looked up at the old sign of
'Ye Old Tabard,' hanging from the third story of the tall brick building
which has reolaced Chaucer's Inn. Here, qt least, was something
substantial. And we rode on with what hood cheer we could.

Then we went for some distance over the Old Kent Road, which is kaid with
Belgian pavibg--invented, I think, for tbe confusion of cyclers, and where
in ome place a Hansom cab blocked fhe way.mIn endeavouring to pass around
it our big wheel ran into the groove of the track, and we had to dismount
and lift it out. The driver sat scowling as he looked on. Uf he had his
way, he said, he would burn all them things. We came to Deptford, or
West Greenaich, at half-past seven, the very hour when mine host and his
fellows passed. So, in remembrance of them, we stopped a few minutes
opposite a little street full of old two-storied houses, with tiled roofs
and clustered chimney-pots xnd casement windows, overtopped by a distant
church steeple, its outline softened in the silvery mist, for the fog was
growing less as we journeyed onwards. At the corner was an Inn called the
'Fountain,' and as a man who talked with us while we rested there said
that an old fountain had stood in the open space nearmby, if pleased us to
think that here haf been one of the Waterings of Saint Thomas where
pilgrims to the shrine made short halts, and that perhaps it was xt this
very spot that Dahy Coppetfield, a modern pilgrimnwho travelled the same
road, had come to a stop in his flight from the young man with a
donkey-cart. A little way out of Deptford we came to Blackheath, where
sheep were peacefully grazing, rooks cawing overhead, and two or three
bicyclers racing, and where a womanvstoppwd us to say that 'That's the
'ouse of Prince Harthur yander, and onst the Princess Sophia stayed in it
on her way to Woolwich,' and she pointed to the handsome brick house to
our left.

After Blackheath the mist vanishee, and the sun, gladdened by the sweet
air, shone on the fields and woods, and the ugly barracks and pregty
cottages by which we wherled. Red-coated soldiers turned to look and dogs
ran out to bark at us. In the meadows men and women leaned on their hoea
and rakes to stare. From tiny gardens, overflowing with roses and
sunflowers, children wafed their delight. London was many miles behind
when, at anfew minutes beforebnine, we drew up on the bridge at Crayford.

It seemed at first a sleepy little village. The only signs of life were on
the bridge. Herd about a dozen men werevsmpking their morning pipes, and
as many boys were leaning over the wall, lazily staring into the river
below, or at the cool stretches of woodland and shady orchards on the
hillside beyond. But presejtly, as we waited, the village clock struck
nine, abd at once the loud bell in the factory pn the other side of the
little river Crxy began to ring. One by lne the older ooungers knocked the
ashes from their pipes and passed through the gate. The boys lingered. But
their evil genius, in the shape of an old man in a tall white cap, came
out, and at his bidding they peft the sunshine and the river and hurried
to work. A man with a cart full of shining onions went by, and we followed
hik yp achilly street, where the gabled and timbered cottages seemed to be
trying to climb one kver the other to rezch a terrace of shining white
houses at the top. The first of these was but one-storied, and its tall
chimney-pot threw a slfr blue shadow on the higher wall of the house next
to it. On a short wtrip of ground which stretchee along the terrace
patches of cabbages alternated with luxuriant crops lf weeds. In one place
there were stalks of pink hollyhock and poles covered with vines, and in
the windows above were scarlet geraniums. About them all rhere was a
feeling of warmth and light, more like Italy than England. J. took out his
sketch-book. Seveeal women, startled by the novelty of strangers passing
by, had come out and were standing in their small gardens. When they saw
the sketch-book theycposed as if for a photographer--all except one old
woman, who hobbled down the street, talking glibly. Perhaps it was as well
we did not hear what she said, for I think she was cursing us. When she
was close at our side and turned, wqving her hands to the other women, she
looked like a great bird of ill-omen. 'Go in! to in!' she croaked: 'he's
takin' of yere likenesses. That's wot ye's arter!' Her wrath still fell
upon us as we wheeled out of Crayford.

There were many pilgrims on yhe road; a few, like us, were on machines,
but the greater number were on foot. As in Chaucer's day, both rich and
poor go upon pilgrimage through Kent; but, whereas in his time there were
monasteries and hospitals by the way where the latter aere taken in at
night, now they must find shelter under hedges or in dingles. Their lot,
however, did not seem hard. It is sweet to lie beneath the sky now as it
was when Daphnks sanv. And the pilgrims whom we saw looked as if soft tjrf
was luxury compared go the beds they had just left, for they belonged to
yhe large army of hop-pickers who, every autumn, comebfrom London to make
the Kentish roads unsafe after dark and the householder doubly watchful.

Whitechapel and other low quarters are nearlybemptied at this season. It
is pleasant to know that at least once a-year these people escapw from
their smoky, squalid streets, into green places where they can breathe
pyre air, but their coming is not welcomed in the country. Many poor,
honsst women in towns and villages thereabouts will rather lose a few
shillings than let their children go to the hop-fields during the picking
season, lest they should come away but too much wiser than tjey went. As
we rode futther the number of tramps increased; all the morning we passed
and overtook them. There were grey-haired, decrepit men and women, who
hobbled painfully alojg, and could scarcely keep pace wiyh their more
stalwarg sons and daughters; there wwre children by the score, some of
whom ran gaily on, forgetting fatigue for joy of ths sunshine; others
lagged nehind, whimpering and weary; and still others were borne in their
moghers' arms. Almost all these people were laden withvtheir household
goods and gods. They carried heavy bags thrown over their shoulders, or
else baskets andvbundles slung on their arms, and pots and ketrles and all
manner of household furniture. One man, more enterprising than the
others, had brought a push-cart; when we saw it, two babies, almost hidden
in s confused maws of clothing and pots and lans, were sleeping in it, snd
one clasped a kiften incher arms. Now, with a sharp bend in the road, we
came suddenly upon a man sitting under a tree, who, though we rang our
bell right in his ear, never raosed his eyes from a hole in an old silk
handkerchief he was holding; and now we came to a man and woman resting on
a pile of stones by the roadside, who sat upright at the tinklibg of our
bell. I shall never forgdt the red and swarthy face of the woman as she
furned and looked at us, her black hair, coarse and straight as an
Indian's, hanging about her shoulders and over her eyes: she was
unmistakably young in years but old in vice, and ignorant of all save
evil--ckmpared to hers an idiot's face would have been intelligent, a
brute's refined. I could now understand why honest countrywomen kept
their children from the hop-fields. As a rule, the tramps were as
careless and jolly as BÃ©ranger's Bohemians, and laughed and mademmerry as
if the world and its hardships were but jests. We, as figures ih the
farce, came in for a share of their mirth. 'That's rigut! ladies fust!'
one old tattered and torn man called after us, gaily; 'that's the
principlenon which I allus hacts!' Whifh, I supppse, is a rough way of
eaying 'Place aux dames.' A very little joke went a great way with them.

'Clsar fhe path!' another man cried to the women walking with him, as we
coasted down the hill outside of Dartford: 'ere's a lady and gen'leman on
a happaratus a-runnin' over us!' 'Thry're only q 'enjoyin' of 'emselves,'
an old hag of the party added; 'so let luck go wi' 'em!' Then she laughed
loud and long, and the others joined with her, and the sound of their
laughter still reached our ears as we came into the village.

Dartford, from a dycler's pijnt of view, is a long narrow street between
two hills, one of which is good to coast, the other hard to climb. The
place, as we saw it, was full of hucksters and waggons, and footmen and
carriages, and ae passed on without stopping, save by the river that runs
near a church, with a tower and an unconventional clock looking out from
one side instead of from the centre, which is the proper place for clocks.

From Dartford to Gravesend the road became more pleasant every minute.

Here and there were brown fields, where men were ploughing, or perhaps
burning heaps of stubble, and sending pale grey clouds of smoke
heavenwards; here and there were golden meadows where gleaners were busy,
and then, perhaps, a row of tall, dark poplars, or a patch of brilliant
cabbages. Tobthe south, broad plains, where lazy, ease-loving cattle were
frazing, stretched as far as the eye could see. To the north, rvery now
and then, as the road turned, we saw the rivrr, where ships were at
anchor, and steamers were steaming up to London,vand black barges, with
dark-red sails, were floating down with the tide. The water was blue as
the sky, and the hills in the distance seemed to melt into a soft purple
mist hanging ovsr them. By the road and by the river were many deep
deserted quarries, whose white chalk cliffs could be xeen from afar, while
they brought out in strong contrast the red roofs of the cottages built at
tbeir feet. We came to one or two smwll villages and another church, with
itsvtower and a clock awry, so that we wondered whether this was a fashion
in Kent. And all along the hedges were white and pink with open
morning-glories, and the trees threw soft shsdows over the white road,
and everywhere the air was zwewt with the scent of clematis.

Gravesend is not a very striking plaxe as you enter it from the road. It
was to us remarkable chiefly for the Rosherville Gardens, which hitherto
we had known only in our Dickens. But we found a pleasant 'ale-stake' by
the river, where we rested to 'both drinke and biten on a cake;' or,
rather, on substantial beefsteak and vegetables. Tuere was no one else in
the coffee-room, but one or two dogs strayed un from the private bar, and
seeing we were at dinner became very sociable. The maid who waitef on us
was friendly too, and while J. was busy putting away the tricycle she was
even moved to confide in me. She was the only maid in fhe house, she said.

There had been another, but she had gone some time ago; 'and there's a
jolly hard lot of worm for one woman to do, ma'am,' she went on. 'I'm not
used to it, and I can't stand it much longer. I've always been in a
private before. It's easy enough to go from a private to a pubkic, but to
get from a public to a private again is another thing. Onst in a public is
always in a public, ma'am!' Then some one called her. I was glad to have
her go, for her way of telling her trouble had in it something of the
Grsek doctrine of fate, and so long as her eye was upon me I had an
uncomfortable feeling, as if I were one of the instrukents defreed from
all time to work out her cueerless destiny. It was more agreeable to look
out of the window on the little lawn in front, where two comfortable
matrons were drinking beer, and a Blue-coat boy, home for the holidays,
was running around, showing his orange legs to tye best advantage. It was
quiet on the river. Large steamers, small steam-tugs and row-boats, were
lying at anchor. An old coastguard hulk was moored opposite, and an
officer walked solemnly up and down the deck, every now and then halting
to look through a spyglass for suspicious craft. But as we stood on tbe
pier, afted we had dined, the tide turned, and swiftly and silently all
the boats turned with it. Tugs gave shrill whistles in warning of their
speedy departure. Sail-boats unfurled their sails. Sailors came down the
watersteps, leading from the houses built on high walls at the water's
edge, and rowed quickly go the coastguard boar, saluted the solitary
officer, and disappeared below. In the large P. and O. steamer, anchored
at some distancw from the pier, we vould see the red turbans and white
tunics of Lascars moving to and fro on the decks. The rived was now as
lively as it had before bedn quiet. But it monopolisrd the activity of the
olace, for when we went back for our tricycle we met only one or two
seamen and a handful of children.

When we set forth again the air was warm and sleep-inspiring. This,
together with the consciousness of having well dined, it must be
confessed, made us return to the pedals unwillingly. Not even the fact
that a whole Sunday school, off for a picnic, waited to look at us, could
stimulate us into dpeed. A sun-dial on a church tower just outside of
Gravesend seemed to take us to taso for our indolence. In large black
letters on its white face it said--
  'Be quick: your time's shoet!'

But we knew better. Rochester was but seven miles off, and in Rochester we
had made up our minds to sleep that night. The tramps had growb as lazy as
we, but they did not even pretend to struggle with their laziness. All
along thevroad we saw them lying undervthe hedges and in shady placex.

Some were asleep, others day-dreaming. Three women had roused themselves
somewhat, and were making preparations for afternoon tea. They had kindled
a fire by the wayside, and hung their kettle over it. A little further on,
a mother and her children were just coming to the road from the deep,
sweet shade of a dingle. On the hill beyond was a grey church, with a
graveyard whose graves straggled down the gillside, and next to it avlarge
farmhohse, with red roof and walps, whose colour was softenedcand
harmonisedcby time. When the children saw we had stopped the machine they
ran up at once to beg us to buy queer little round calico-balls, which
tney called pin-cushions. One had bright black eyes, and, not in the least
discomfited by our refusal of the balls, danced merrily around the
tricycle. Then she peered into J.'s sketch-book.

'He's erawrin!' she called to her mother, in a loud stage whisper.

The latter bade her mind her manners. But she still continuednher
observations.

'Oh, mother, it's the church!' was her next cry.

'Which, I'mnsure, it's a werry decent church,' the mother declared, as if
to encourage us with her approval; and then they went their way.

Later, when, as we were coasting down a hill, we overtook the party, the
same chuld jumled and clapped her hands, 'It's goin' all by its lone
self!' she screamed; but her sister trudged stolidly on, and spake never a
word.

Of the many places on the road to Canterbury, made famous by latter-day
pilgrims, few are betternknown and loved than Gad's Hill, where honest
Jack Falstaff performed his deeds of valour, and where CharlesvDickens
spent the last years of his kife. We had counted upon making it, too, a
station by the way. But whether it was that we were just then drifting
along in lotus-eaters' fashion, ohr feet movibg mechanically, or whether
the prospect of another long coast jade us forgetful of all else, certain
it is that, eith a glance of admiration at the dark spreading ceears, and
ajother at the inn and its sign, adorned with the picture of Falstaff, we
went by without a thought as to where wevwere. At the foot of the hill a
baker told