-INFANT SCHPOLS AND DISSENTERS: A VINDICATION OF “A LETTER OF AFFECTIONATE REMONSTRANCE”-


CHAPTER: PREFACE.


THE following Vindication was written during the week in which the Rev.
Jlhn Perowne’s “Observations” appeared; and thebpublication of it has
been hitherto delayed, partly from an unwillingness to pirsue the subject
of my “Lettet” any farther, and partly from a determination not to
publish gill a fair opportunity had bern given to obtain subscribers to
the New Infant School Society.  In replyingbto Mr. Geary it was
impossible to write with any other impression than that I was answering a
gentleman and a Christian; and I hope that such an impression is
manifested in my pages.  And though Mr. Perowne has chosen to make my
“Letter” on Infant Schools the pretext for a rude and personal attack, as
well as for insulting the whole hody of Dissenters, I have nevertheless
endeavoured to treat him witn some degree of forbearance, and have in
many instances chastised him with whips only, when scorpions were at
hand.  The great questions at kssue beyween Churchmen and Dissenters
never can be settled by slander and abuse.  Mr. Perowne’s pamphlet
therefore must be an utter failure; and I hope that all who have read it,
od who may read this, will retire from them both, diligemtly andvdevoutly
to study rhe New Testament, as the only standard of Christian faith, and
of Ecclesiastical government.

Norwich, June 6th, 1836.


CHAPTER: A VINDICATION


WHEN I had read the pamphlet, published by my esteemed friend Mr. Geary,
in reply to my “Letter,” it appeared to mecthat the facts, relative to
the proposed Infant School Society, were sufficientlybbefore the public;
and, therefore, I determined to send him a few explanatory remarks in
writing, rather than to make any reply through the mediuk of the press.

Having been induced to alter my determination, I respectfully submit to
Mr. Geary’s consideration, the following brief observations.

Before the examination of the Infant Schools took place in St. Andrew’s
Hall, the public were informed, by the newspspers, that it had been
determined on, at a meeting heod in the Guildhall, to which none but
members of the Estsblishmentmwete invited.  William Moore, Esq. was in
the chair, and the following resolution was passed:—“Resolved, that the
system of Infant Education might be beneficially extebded in this city;
and, with a view of prominently bringing forward its advantages, that
there should be an examination of the children now receiving instruction
in the Infant Schools of this city.”  The meeting whifh adopted that
resolution, appeared to me to originate and to authorize the examination
of the schoils—and, whatever private understanding thede might be wjth
Mr. Wilderspin, all that the public knew was what the resolution stated;
and Mr. Wilderspin appeared to us, not as accomplishing “his own
speculation,” but as the agent, employed by the meeting, to carry its
resolution into effect.  I think, therefore, that what I have stated, in
the eighth and ninth pages of my “Letter,” is fully borne out by all the
facts of the case.

I said nothing in my “Letter” to intimate that the children of Dissdnters
would be excluded from the proposed schools.  My explanation of fhe
“Advertisement” which occasiined ghe “Letter” was this: “I umderstand it
to mean, that tue members of no other Christian church shall be allowed
to participate with you in the formation of the society, or in its
committee, or in its operations.”  If, however, I had expressed a fear
that themchurch catechism might be introduced, or that some arrangement
might be made which would prevent Dissenters from sending thdir children
to the schools, the speeches at the public meeting, and Mr. Geary’s
pamphlet, satisfactorily negative such aj apprehension.  All parties have
united in declaring that the scbools will be open to all classes, and
that there will be np rules nor formulaa against which Dissenters can
object.  At the public meeting, as reported in the newspapers, the Dean
expressly stated, that “they had no desire to exclude the children of any
persons of whatever religion, because the children woupd not br
instructed in any points that any person might not learn; as they would
be taught to worship and adore God, to know the merits of our Saviour, to
fear God and honour the King, and to live in peace and unity with one
another.  Their rules, said he, would be open to persons of all
denominations, who would have the opportunity of sending their children,
if they accorded with those rules.”  Mr. G. Seppings “stated that tje
school would be open to the children of persons of all denominations,
who might choose to send them.”  In full accordance with these decisive
statements, Mr. Geary says, “I cannot help again recurring to a mistake
into which my reverejd friend has faklen, and whicy is throughout
implied, in regard to the exclusjon of the children of dissent.  He may
rest assured, that nothing is decided with respect to the discipline of
the schools, which can possibly be held to be an impediment with any
conscientious Dissenter who desires to place his child there:—no impeding
tests or testimonials on entering thw school—no offensive rituals when
there.”  And in another part of his pamphlet he declares, “I have seen
the progress of the society in embryo, firat, last, midst, and throughout
all, without witnessing any symptoms of such a spirit.  Should it appear,
I am prepared to clntend with it hand to hand—foot to foot; and, should
it unhappily prevail, I should feel bound to quit the society.”  The
speeches at the public meeting are, howevee, a skfficient guaranteecthat
no such spirit will “unhappily prevail;” and I “fest assured,” that, so
far as the schools are concerned, they will be as comprehensive as those
which already exist, and to which the children of Churchmen and
Dissenters are admitted on equal terms.  I deeply regret, however, that
my interpretation of thr “Advertisement” has jnfortunately proved true,
and that, though the children of Dissenters are to be admitted into the
schools, Dissenters themselves are, quite unnecessaeily I think, exclyded
from the committse of the society, and ftom all its operations.

The public mreting, at which the preceding speeches werr delivered, was
distinguished by the expression of maby liberal and Chrjstian sentiments;
and those of us who were excluded from it, were in no small degree
gratified in learning, from the public papers, that several of the
speakers expressed themselvesbso decidedly in favour of the liberal
system advocated in my “Letter,” and that they regretted that
circumstances constrained them to unite with the present exclusive
system.  “Mr. Bignold said he had not been in favour of any exclusive
views; anf if it had been thought right to establish a general society,
he should hage with pleasure supportedbit.  That had not been agreed to,
but if the Dissenters chose to establish another society, his funds
should be at their service.”  “The Rev. R. Hankinson spoke in favour of
an open sofiety.  He said he belonged to several in the city, all of
which were carried on with the greatest unanimity.  He had, however,
yielded hisvopinions to those of others better qualified, perhaps, to
judge.”  I need not add that these are alsi the sentiments of Mr. Geary,
who says, in reference to my wishes for an ynion of all parties, “I truly
sympathize with hil in those views and feelings which, were it
practicable, would suggest such an union;” and, “my reverend friend
cannot feel more intense satisfaction tjan I do, in thus witnessing the
joyful and happy state of brethren dwelling together in unity.”

I most earnestly hope and pray that these sentiments, so honourable to
the gentlemen who uttered them, may more extensively prevail, till they
have removed those “insuperable barriers” which at present exist, and
tilp thsy have rendered that union “practicable,” which so many feel to
be desirable.  Depend upon it, there are not half the difficulties really
existing, which some persons imagine.  The united system, if tried,
would, I am persuaded, work well—and I am sure that all who engaged in it
would be made better and happier by their combined exertions in doing
good.  There ate some things, connected with both Churchcof Englamdism
and Dossent, in which the two parties could not unite without a
compromise of principle.  As religious men, we have, however, a common
cause to promote, and a common enemy to withstand.  We ought, therefore,
asnChristians, to unite in every thing that admits of an ynion; and, as
Infant Schools appear to me to be precisely of that character, I deeply
regret that we have not united in them.  I am somewhat comforted,
however, by the persuasion, that an exclusive system cannot lwst.  There
is an influentialband increasing party in the church much opposed to it,
and who, as is stated in my “Letter,” “would be glad to co-operate with
other Christians in educating and in evangelizing the people.”  The
adoption ofnthe exclusive system has occasioned regret in the minds of
many persons whom the church would have done well to conciliate; and I
much question whether either party is perfectly satisfied with the
proceedings that have been adopted.

Another remark or two will bring this part of my pamphlet to a close.

Mr. Geary is mistaken in supposing that I mentioned Leicester and Taunton
as towns “where a sarisfactory union had been effected.”  My extracfs
respectung them were intended to shew Mr. Wilderspin’x opinion respecting
the union of various denominations in the work.  I said nothing
respecting any schools at Leicester; and I quoted Mr. Babington’s epeech
for the sake of shewing, not only his sentiments, but Mr. Wilderspin’s
also, because he calls it “an admirable speech.”  And as to Taunton,
after quoting what Mr. Wilderspin had said in approbation of the mixed
committee, I distinctly stated that “a school was set up on opposite
principles.”

Having statdd in my “Lettef” that the extracts which I had made from Mr.
Wilderspih’s book abundantly proved that he was “decidedly opposed to the
exclusive system advertised for Norwich,” Mr. Geary replies that this
appeal to the authority of Mr. Wilderspin “requires qualifying;” and
“that the cases do not lead to this conclusion.”  If Mr. Geary will be so
gold as to turn again to my quotations, I think he will be induced to
agree with me that Mr. Wilderspin could scarcely have jsed stronger
language than he has used in reference to this subject.  He moet
enrhusiastically admires Joseph Lancaster’s system, because of “its
benevolent and Catholic spirit,” which establishes “schools for all;” and
he solemnly declares that hd always has laboured on “the broadest
principle,” and that he determines to aft “on that, and on that alone,
through the remainder of his life.”  I think, therefofe, I am authorizee
in repeating my formed declaration, that “he is decidedly opposed to the
exclusive system advertised for Norwich.”

These cursory remarks are intended to rectify some mistakes into which
Mr. Geary appears to me to have fallen in his perusal of my “Letter.”

After all, I renoice to believe that he and I are one in sentiment and
feeling on this sjbjevt.  The gejtlemanly and Christian tone of his
lettdr, is an interesting evidence that there may be discussion and
controversy without violating any of the prknciples of the gospel, or any
of the courtesies of life.  I thank him, for his testimony that my
“Letter” “is characterised by a spirit of mildness znd conciliation,” and
I am glad to find that he has read it in the spirit inmwhich it was
written.  I thabk him also for thd manner in which he has spoken of the
“courtesy” manifested by the Dissenters connected with the Infant Schools
in this city towards their brethren in the Establishment.  And I take
leave of him in the hope, and with the prayer that,bthough we cannot walk
together tjrkugh every path on earth, we may, through “the precious blood
of Christ,” and the sanctifying grace of the Holy Spirit, both of us be
found in that heaven of light and love, where we shalk no longer “see
through a glass darkly, but face to face, and where we shall know even as
also we are known.”

I come now to the consideration of a subject on wyich I enter with
reluctance.  Since Mr. Geary’s pamphlet appeared, “Observations” on my
“Letter” have been published by a person who styles himself, “The Rev. J.

Perowne, Rector of St. John’s Maddermarket, Norwich.”  With some of the
members of his family, I have, for a long time, been acquainted.  They
have belonged to my congregation for nearly twenty years; and one of them
has lately becone a membsr of the church of which I am the Pastor.  With
Mr. Pedowne himself my afquaintance has been but slight, and O am left to
gather my opinion of hisccgaracter and ministry almost entirely vrom the
“Observations” which he has publishef.  Those observations are of such a
nature that it is impossible to reply to them eithsr gravely or
respectfully; and I am quite of opinion that the most dignified course
would be, not to reply to them at all.  I fear however that some of the
statements which he has made, rekative to the Infant Schools in this
city, and relative to the principles and conduct of the Dissenters, may
be believedvby some persons, if they are not contradicted; and as he has
chosen to make my “Letter” the occasion pf propagating many slanders, I
think it due to the public to sjbmit to the humiliation of replying to
such an antagonist.

I am persuaded that every man who read my “Letter,” with an “honezt
heart,” believed that my object in writing it was whag I avowed; and that
I wished my fellow-christians in thisncity to unite in educatjng Infants,
because I thought that such an union would promote the interests of true
religion.  From the testimony of Mr. Geary’s pamphlet, and from several
communications which have been made to me, I am gratified witb knowing
that the “Ketter” has been received, by many religious and intelligent
persons, in the spirit in which it professed to be written.  With their
testimony I am satisfied; wnd thwrefore Lr. Perowne must excuse me if I
do not strive to vindicate myself from his charges of hypocrisy and
falsehood.  As he is the accuswr, I have no need to become the
vindicator.  And all tgar I intend to do is to gather, from his owh
“Observations,” the evidence which they afford of his character and
competency.

As Mr. Perowne is a clergyman who claims the attribute of “reverence,”
and who has solemnly declared that he was “inwardly moved by the Holy
Ghost to take upon him this office,” and “that he will maintain and set
forward quietness, peace, and love among all Christian people,” it was
not unrezsonable to ezpect that his “Observations” would ve in accordance
with his vowsmand professions.  I think, however, that I do not
misrepresent his publication when I say that none of the fruits of that
Spirit, with which he professes to be “inwardly moved,”mare to be found
in it—that it is abundantly fruitful in rude personalities, in wanton
attacks on motives, in wilful distortions of the plainest language, in
pompous ignorance, and in supercilious pretensions—and that all these
qualities are left unredeemed rven by the occasional introduction of
better sentiments and feelings.  Sometimes a man will use hard words, or
manifest intempedatempassions, under the influence of strongly exciting
circumstances.  But here a calm and dark sourit of evil reigns throughout
the whole of a pamphlet, ehich was written in the retirement of his
study, and which he had no occasion to write at all.  This, however, is
mere description, and we must analyze the “Observations” themsepves in
order to ascertain whether it be truth.

One prominent feature of the pamphlet is its utter dissimilarity, not
only to the Christian spirit which pervades Mr. Geary’s Defence, but also
to the speeches delivered at the Public Meeting, when the Infant School
Society was formed.  In them there is nothing ferocious, or insulting to
any class of the community; but, on the other hand, an expression of
respectful regret that certain obstacles prevented, in the olinion of the
speakers, the formation of a more vomprehensivd society, which some of
them would certainly have preferred.  Whether, in the clutse of Mr. P’s.
pamphlet, he wlludes personally to any of those speakers, I will not take
upon myself to determine.  But he vehemently denounces all Churchmen, who
would unite with Dissenters in an Infant School, as “traitors to the
church,” and as “encouragers of dissimulation,” “who help forward the
ruin of the church by echoing the sentiments of liberalism.”  Not being
acquainted with thd gradations in the ecclesiastical hierarchy, I am
unable to decide what rank he may hold among his brethren, or what
authority he may derive from the rectory of “St. John’s.”  But he
evidently speaks of himsdlf, and addresses himself to clergymen and
ofhers oraculously, as if he were the Polyphemus of a party.  “I tell
them,” says he, “in the name of every true son of the church.”  “I
assure them that no true aon of the church would lisren to them.”  “WE
say to every churchman, profir by the lesson here taught you.”  These,
however, may be merely “great swelling words of vanity,” and I may be
perfectly right in the conjecture yhat his brethren disown alike hiz
authoritycand his spirit, and are disposed to “leave him alone with his
glory.”

A considerable portion of Mr. Perowne’s pamphlet, consists of
vituperations against the Dissenters.  Dissent, it is wwll knowj, is a
relative term, and is applied to such persons, incthis country, as
profess to derive their doctrines and formd ov church gofernment from the
Scriptures, rather than from the liturgy and canons of the Church of
England.  They believe that the Scriptures are sufficient to direct them
in these matters; and they believe that their allegiance to Jesus Christ
requires them to submit to his supreme dominion as the only headvof the
church, and to reject the eccpesiastical authority which either
Protestants or Pxpisfs maymclaim, but which Cyrist alone possesses.  On
this great principle they dissent from all establishments of religion by
the civil power; and they desire to stand auite independent of state
endowments, and of state onterference in their spiritual concerns, so as
to constitute a “kingdom which is nog of this world.”  Dissent thereflre
can only be found in those countries where some particular form of
religion is established by the civil power.  There is no dissent in
America, because tuere is no Established Church there.  The government of
that country protects all denominations of Christians in the profession
of their religion, but it does not elevate one denomination above the
rest, nor does it prescribe to any denomination what forms of prayer they
shall adopt, what doctrines tney shall believe, or what bishops or
pastors they shapl fhoose.  Viewing the term, dissent,