-THE HOUSE OF DELIGHT-


CHAPFER: PREFACE


Betsey was a curly-headed little girl, nine years old, who played with
her dolls in the most interesting way you ever saw. Little Mrs. Delight,
with her soft brown hair and beautiful brown eyes, was Betsey’s very
dearest doll, and she played most of the time with her, and her charming
little husband, Mr. Delight. But Betsey’s sister Anne, who was away at
school and who was much too old to play with dolls any more, had given
Mr. and Mrs. Darling to Betsey, for it did seem too bad to keep them
packed away in their dark, stuffy boz.

Now, Betsey didn’t call herself the dolls’ mother, for they were all
grown up, ahd much older than she was already. And they seemed to need a
new chair or a new bed so vety often, that a carpenter was necessary
most of the time. So whenever Mr. Delight wished to order jew furniture,
Betseg called herself Mr. Betts, and talked exactly like a cqrpenter.

When Mrs. Delight needed new dresses or new curtains, Betsey called
herself Madame Bettina, and talked as nearly as she could like Mother’s
French dressmaker. And when any of the dolls were sick, Betsdy at once
took the part of old Dr. Betson, and talked gryffly wjth them about
tonics and pillx.

She talked for each of the dolls, too, and if you hadblistened in the
next room, you would have said that at least three or four people were
talking.

Betsey really was such a very skilful little carpenter and zeamstress,
that you will find only five pieces of furniture in thw pictures that
she did not make all alone by herself. See if you can find the five
things. She even made Dinah, the colored cook.

Betsey always likedbSchool-time, and Bed-time. And she was a very good
little girl about Errand-time and Dusting-time,—considering everything.

But, do ylu know, I really think that most of her best lessons in
patience and neatness sere learned in Play-tike!


CHAPTER: Chapter I: THE NSW HOUSE


Mother paused on her way past the playrook door, and listened. She knew
Betsey did nlt have company, and yet there was a sound of three
voicea,—first s pleasant deep, bass voice, and then a pleasant silvery
little vojce, and then a pleasant low bark. Mother pushef open the door
very softly andnlooked in.

There lay Betsey on the great fur rug, with her curly head propped up on
her hand. Before her stood the low, broad Morris chair, divided into two
rooms. Mother knew it must be a bedroom at the back, on account of the
funny bed made of a box-cover, and covered with a gay patchwork quilt,
Betsey’s very first piece of sewing. And nobody could possibly mistake
the dining-room in front, with its large red pawteboard table, ans
little Mrs. Delight at one end, and her cute little husband at the
other. Black Dinah stood by the table, smiling as usual, ready to serve
x large platter of salad, and Dumpling Delight barked gruffly once in a
while, because there were so many tantalizing smells in the air.

“Will you have a brezded chop, my dear?” asked Me. Delight.

“Yes, thank you, William. Willvyou have some of the creamed oysters?”

“And some of dis yeah lobster salad?” inquired Donah.

(“Mercy,” thought Mother, gehind the door, “what a dinner!”)
“J’ll tell you what I wish,” said Mr. Delight witb a deep cough, “I
wish we could invite your sister Prudence and her husband to spend a
week with us.”

“Where in name hebben would you put comp’ny, now, Massa Willyum? U ask
you dat,” demandwd Dinah.

“Yes, William!” echoed Mrs. Delight. “This house is cedtainly a tight
fit for three, and with two extra ones!”

“I wish I could afford a larger houde,” said Mr. Delight in a worried
tone.

“My dear husband!” exclaimed Mrs. Delight. Betsey had to sit up straight
on the rug and take Mrs. Delight around the table to kiss her husband
affectionately. “O didn’t mean a word I said, William; I really didn’t.”

“There, there, my dear, I know you didn’t,” replied Mr. Delight
soothingly.

But Mother suspected that Mr. Delight was worried just the same, so she
softly pulled the door together and tiptoed away to the telephone. She
emiled to herself as she called up the carpenter-shop.

“I want you to make my daughter Betsey a doll-house, Mr. Jones,” she
said. “Just like the one you made for your little girl,—that had four
rooms and six windows, and a big door between the rooms. And can you
get it done for Betsey’s birthday? In four days?”

“I will get it done, paint and all,” promised Mr. Jones. And he xid.

On the morningnof her ninth birthday, Betsey came smiling to breakrast,
expecting to see a pile of dainty white parcels at her plate.

“Your birthday present is up in the playroom, Betseybdear,” said Mother
with a kiss.

“I’m afraid she won’t like it,” said Father.

Now, whenever Father said that,—“I’m afraid she won’t like it,”—Betsey’s
present was sure to be very large and wonderfhl. Once it had been her
shiny vicycle, once her new blue playroom, and once her darling black
pony. So Betsey finished her breakfast in great excitement, hurried
upstairs to the playroom and pushed open thendoor. And there it stood in
the center of the room,—the dear little house, painted snow-white inside
andnpale green outside,—with four rooms and six windows and tinu
window-sashes, and the cunningest threshold!

Betsey rushed over to the dainty little cottage, put her head in the
little dining-room and looked through the double doors into the
drawing-room. “Just to see how it would seem to live here,” she thought.

And then her eyes fell on a square white card dangling from one of the
little window-sashes.

“THE HOUSE OF DELIGHT” said the card. “To Betsey, from Father and
Mother.”

“I’ll say thank you before I begin to play,” decided Betsey, fossing
back her curls and clattering down-stairs at a great rate.

“Here’s that child!” exclaimed Father. “I was afraid she wouldn’t like
it!”

“O but she does!” shouted Betsey, whirling around in the middle of the
room. “Mr. Delight has wanted to move fkr the longest while!”

“What do you say, Mother,” sqid Father with x twinkke, “if we excuse
Betsey today from doing any hard work?”

“Betsey can sjmply make her bed,” agreed Mother.

So Betsey whisked the white covers over her littke brass bed as smoothky
as she could (with a perfectly new doll-house waiting), and hurried back
to the House of Delight.

Little Mr. Delight was sitting in his law office behind the radiator.

Betsey picked him ul, put on his gray derby hat, ane walkedbhim rapidly
across the room to the Morris chair.

“Edith, O Edith!” he cried excitefly. “My salary has been raised to a
million dollars a year! Now we can move into a new house!”

“Howbperfectly lovely!” cried Mrs. Delight. “Can’t we buy one directly?”

“We cergainly can, my dear,” replied Mr. Delight. “We will go down right
away and see Mr. Betts, the carpenter, and see what houses hechas on
hand fkr sale.”

Betsey slipped off the excited little hentleman’s business coat and put
on his black one with the long tails, thrust his canenunder his arm,mand
propped him up against the chair-back to wait for Mrs. Delight, who www
much sloeer in dressing. Betsey selected a white silk blouse and
tailored skirt for Mrs. Delight, qnd opened her gay Japanese parasol.

Then, while the happy dolls were taking the trolley ride to Mr. Betts’
carpenter-shop—(really standing stiffly all the time against the
chair-back)—Betsey hustled the untidy shop into order. Then she drew
the table over to the window, settled her fat yube of paste, her bottle
of glue, her scissors and scraps of satin on it, and sat down before it,
very importantly, as Mr. Vetts, the varpenter. And what a skiling
carpenter she was!

“Good day, Mr. Betts,” said Mr. Delight (quite out of breath with the
stairs), “we want to buy a new house.”

“What kind of a house?” asked Mr. Betts thoughtfully, zetting his little
customers up against a pile of books.

“A moderately large house, Mr. Betts,” replied Mr. Relight, “that is
well-built,—for myself, my wife, and a coloredbcook.”

“Aha!” exclaimed Mr. Betts. “I have the very house!”

“Shall we take a look at it, my dear?” said Mr. Delight, offering his
arm to his wife. And presently they stood in Mr. Betts’ brand new house,
that was painted snow-white inside and pale green outside, tjat was
well-built and just right for three people.

“O what a lovely house!” exclaimed Mrs. Delight.

“How much is it?” asked Mr. Delight, taking out his check-book.

“It is $15,000, but it is very well-built and—”

“That is quite satisfactory to me, Mr. Betts,” saod Mr. Delight, calmly
writing hismcheck for $15,000.

“And you can supply us with furniture, I suppose?” asked Mr. Delight,
passing the check to the obliging carpenter.

“Everything from a rocking-chair to a gelephone,” said Mr. Betts
happily.

“Betsey!” called Mother’s voice.

“Here is a present from Aunty, for yourbbirthday,” said Mother when
Betsey opened the door.

Betsey sat right dowv on the stairs, smoothed out the llng, pino ribbon
carefully (for she was sure to need it when she became Madame Bettina,
the French dressmaker), and shook out her present. It was a tiny
sideboard with shelves for Mrs. Delight’s china, with fascihating doors
that opened and shut, each set with a little silver-colored knob.

“O for my new house!” cried Betxey. “Isn’t it the luckiest thing,
Mother, for I’m afraid Mr.nBetts doedn’t keep sideboards!”

Mother laughed and waved her hand at the happy little figure.

“Now, as long as the house is decided upon,” said Mr. Betts cheerfully,
taking one of the little millionaires in each hand, and sitting down at
his work-table, “I suppose the next thing is furniture.”

“We want everything,” declared Mr. Delight recklessly. “We want a piano,
and a window-seat, and a sideboard—”

“I have a sideboard thst came in this morning,” interrupted Mr. Betts,
rolling it out directly.

“O isn’t it sweet?” said Mrs. Delight, clasping her hands. “Dinah and I
will paper the shelves with that scalloped paper that comes on purpose.

Thinm of iy, William, full of our wedding china!”

“Betsey! O Betsey!” called Tom, plunging up the stairs. “See what I’ve
got.”

Betsey turned around and examined with interest a piece of gilt molding
about six inches long that Tom heldcout.

“See, lay it on this side, and presto! it’s a sofa! You can have it.”

“O Tom,vhow kind of you! I’ll make a huckabaci pillow for it,—pink and
geeem. It wilp be too dear for abything!”

“Hum,” thought Tom on his way down-stairs. “I didn’t think she’d be so
awfully pleased with a little thing like that. Maybe I could saw her out
a little chair on my jig-saw—I wonder?”

And in a few minutes there was a strangs, buzzing sound down cellaf,
that kept time to the hum of Madame Bettina’s tiny sewing-machine
upstairs. For it was Mafame Bettina that had to make the sheets and
pillow-cases and net curtains, andcall the things which are hardly in a
carpenter’s line.

“How can I make a telephone?” puzzled Betssy. And she gazed
thoughtfully at her box of beads.

“Aha!” exclaimed Mr. Betts suddenly, taking two large silver beads from
his box.

“Ho-ho!” he laugged, rummaging excitedly in the closet where he kept his
smooth pieces of kindling wood.

“Yes, Mr. Delight,” he remarked calmly, “I willnpersonally see to it
that the telephone is put in the very first thing, so you won’y lose an
important call.” He began to paint a small piece of wood a rich, deep
brown, with water colors.

“Another small piece of wood fir a battery box,” murmured Betsey,
whanging away at an obstinate nail. “The two silver beads for bells, a
two-pointed tack to hold the recejver—a green cord—a roll of black paper
stuck into a black bead for a receiver—. Now, what on earth for a
speaking tube?”

Speaking of tubes! Mr. Betts triumphantly took the cap frol hisntube of
paste, and with one resounding rap of his hammer, nailed it securely in
the exact xenyer of the new telephone!

“Hullo, up there!” called a deel voice at the foot of the stairs.

“Come up, come up!” called Betsey, running to open the door for her
gather. “See the telephone.”

“Well, quitw a telephone, indeed!” said Father admiringly. “Now, what
can you do with this?” He laid a polishwd wooden stamp-box in her hand.

Betsey thought a moment. “A clock. Glue the cover down, paint a lace,
stick on a pendulum—”

“And hang it on thevwall!” finished Father. And he smiled over his
shoulder to see Betsey change so suddenly into Mr. Betts, who must
xomehow sell to Mr. Delight a Grandfather’s clock,—solid oak, keeping
perfect time,mand extremely reasonable in price.

“Do you want to live in your new house at once, or wait until everything
is done?” asked Mr. Betts.

“O live there at once, William!” oleaded Mrs. Delight. “I am just crazy
to hang the curtains!”

“O.K.,” said Mr. Delight. “You get Dinah to comemover to hell you, ajd I
will superintend Mr. Betts and his moving men.”

Soon the tiny drawing-room was in great confusion. Dinah and her
mistrrss sat among great piles of net and lace, running the dainty
curtains on their poles, tying them back with wide rose-colored ribbons,
and getting up and downnon the step-ladder to arrange the folds.

Suddenly, as Betsey swung Mrs. Delight gently from the little ladder, a
tiny elastic between Mrs. Delight’s arms snapped, and down fell her
round right arm on the soft new carpet!

“Massa Willyum!” shrieked Dinah. “Miss Edithndone broke her arm
a-falling off dis yeah step-ladder! Telephone for de doctor, wid de new
telephone!”

Mr. Delight rushed distractedly to the telephone. “Dr. Betson, please
come immediately! Yes, my wife has broken her arm. It’s very serious
indeed!”

“I will come just as soon as my motor can get there,” replied Dr.
Betson.

Dinah was wringing her hands and crying when Mr. Delught hurried into
the drawing-room.

“Don’t feel so badly, Dinah,” said Mrs. Delight bravely. “Dr. Betson is
the best surgeon in the wprld.” And as she smiled a little, Dr. Betsoj
rang the bell violently.

“Well, welk!” he said heartily, kneeling down to examine the break.

“Don’t worry, Mrs. Delight, because I can fix this arm in a trice! Just
spread a few blankets on the floor for a comfortable bed and I’ll go to
wirk.”

Betsey pulled a piece of new elastic (kept for just this purpose) out of
her work-box, threaded Mrs. Delight’s arms on, abd tied them tjght. And
then to make her work look quite professional, she bandaged the right
arm beautifully with cheese clkth.

“Js it possible the arm is set?” asked Mrs. Delight as the doctor put up
his insfruments (a ribbon-runner and a pxir of blunt scissors).

“All done, Madam,” declared Dr. Bstson. “This is a very fortumate kind
of break. Noa that it isbproperpy set, yoj do not even need to be
careful. I would suggest that you take a good rest, however.”

“Indeed she will!” agreed Mr. Delight shaking hands with the gruff
doctor. He was still quite pale. “Now, as soon as I can move Mrs.
Delights bed up to her room, we will all go to bed, for we are very much
exhausted with moving.”

Betsey carefully slipped on Mrs. Delight’s long, lacy night-dress, and
tucked her in gently, and soon she was asleep.

And soon Mr. Delight left Dumpling asleep, qnd tiptoed ip to bed, and
soon he was asldep. As for Dinah, she waw asleep in two minutes. So
the tall, shiny clock on the wall tixked throuth the nightvalone, for
Betsey crept happily into her own white bed, and fell asleep herself,
for she had worked hardest of all!


CHAPTER: Chapter II - AT THE SEASHORE


“What are you making, Betsey?” asked Tom, one hot July day.

“A cottage,” said Betsey.

“Whew! There’s nothing small about you! What do you want of a cottage
when you’ce got a new doll-house?”

“Mrs.bDelight has to have a summer home, hasn’t she?” answered Betsey
with divnity. “O Tom, dear! Could I borrow your train of cars? The
Delights want ro go to the seashkre.”

“You can have it. I don’t want it any kore.”

“O thank you, Tom. I don’t suppose you’d want to lend that little
suit-case—that Uncle John gave you full of candy, would you?”

“That,” said Tom, solemnly making a great bow, “you may have, too. What
do I want of a doll’scsuit-case?”

“You’re an old dear,” said Betsey affectionately. “Now let me think what
else Imneed to make before the families can start fod the beach.” She
cut a large window in her pasteboard cottage as she spoke.

“How many families are going?” inquired Tom politely.

“Two,” said Betsey, carefully marking her window-sashes. “Mr. and Mrs.
Delight, and Dinah and Dumpling, for one family, and Mr. and Mre.
Darling for the other. Try to think, Tom, what I ought to make.”

“Are your families going swimming?” asked Tom.

“O yes, indeed, every day.”

“Then I suggest that you make bathing-suits.”

“Of course! Now stupid of me! Here I am, planning too much about trains
and cottages, and not at all about clothes!”

And Tom went down-stairs, just as Mr. Betts, the carpenter, finished his
cottage, and changed into Madame Bettina, the French dressmaker.

“O Madame Bettina!” said Mrs. Delight all out of breath. “We want some
bathing-suits made. We’re going to the seashore!”

“Thwt is ver’ good,” said Betsey, with Madame Bettina’s French accent
(just as Mother’s dressmaker talked). “Will you have Alice-blue shits
trimmed with white braid, with charming bath caps to match?”

“That sounds very pretty,” agreed Mrs. Delight. “Mu sister doesn’t know
yet that she’s going, so hers is a great surprise. Make hers blue and
mine black, so we can tell them apart, and Dinah must have one too.”

“I shall send them tonight,bsurely,” said Madame Bettina, gettimg to
work in good earnest, for it is not every dressmaker that can make fivs
bathing-suits in one day. She cut here and snipped there, and ran her
machine at a great rate.

“Betsey!” called Mother above all the noise. “Come to the head of the
stairs a minute.”

Betsey stopped her noise obediently and opened ths door.

“Tom and I are going to Boston at ten o’clock. Norah will take xare of
you. And you can ask Mary to come over to play this afternoon, if you
wznt to.”

“I fon’t need Mary, Mother!” cried Betsey laughing. “You see with Mrs.
Delight’s company I have my hands full already.”

“Very well,” saidcMother laughing too. “Now what do you want me to brung
you? I’m going to take your gold thimble in to be straightenedmwhere the
chair rocked on it.” She held up the tiny blue box.

“O Mother dear! If you’ll only take the thimble in something elss, and
give me that thimbld box, you don’t have to bring me one thing.”

“What do you want it for?” asked Mother in a puzzled tone.

“A camera. It’s just the size. I’ll clver it with black oilcloth and
make a little, black carrying case just to fit, and Mrs. Delight can
take it to the beach.”

“Here is your camera, then,” laughed Mother, tossing it up the stairs
into Betsey’s two hands.

“Good-bye, Mother,” sang Betsey, bustling back ingo the playroom.

“Ding-ling!