-Spices, Their Histories: Valuable Information for Grocers-


CHAPTER: INTRODUCTION.


The history of spices, with other valuable information to all branches
of the grocery trade, was originally written by Robert O. Fielding, of
the staff of the Trade Register, in which the several articles appeared
in various issues of that journal, duly protected by copyright, with
the accompanying illustrations.

Retail grocers everywhere will find this little book of especial value
for study and reference. It is all meat for the salesman who realizes
that success in trade these days depends upon knowing where the goods
he handles were produced, how to judge their qualities, how they are
prepared for market, and what are their uses. How to sell, the market
conditions, etc., are continuously set forth in the weekly issues of
the Trade Register, $2 a year, by men who have had practical experience
behind the counter.

                              Editor.


CHAPTER: ALLSPICE OR PIMENTO


A Valuable Product From Jamaica Which Combines the Flavor of Cloves,
Cinnamon and Nutmeg
Allspice is the dried unripe berries of a tree of the myrtle family,
the pimento, known botanically as Eugenia pimenta, or Pimenta
officinalis. It’s an evergreen tree some 20 to 30 ft. high, with a
slender, straight, upright trunk, much branched at the top; the bark
is smooth, gray and aromatic; the leaves--which when fresh abound
in essential oil--are 5 in. long, of an oblong shape and deep shiny
green color; the blossoms--which appear in July and August--are white
and fragrant; the berries (sometimes called corns), which form on the
disappearance of the flower, are picked unripe, altho fully grown, they
are of a greenish-purple color. After picking, the berries are dried in
the sun or in kilns until dark brown and then separated from the stalk.

The dried berries are light, brittle, of roundish form and crowned with
the remains of the flower calyx in the shape of a raised, seared-like
ring; each berry contains two dark-brown flattish, kidney-shaped
seeds. If allowed to ripen, the berries lose their aromatic flavor and
become merely sweet and pulpy. Only in Jamaica--where it is cultivated
in plantations called Pimento walks--does the pimento tree grow to
perfection, altho attempts are made to cultivate it in other West India
islands and South America. It is thought to combine the flavor of
cloves, cinnamon and nutmeg, hence it is called allspice.

If they were to do nothing else, the effects which Bahá’u’lláh’s life and
writings have already had should command the earnest attention of anyone
who believes that human nature is fundamentally spiritual and that the
coming organization of our planet must be informed by this aspect of
reality. The documentation lies open to general scrutiny. For the first
time in history humanity has available a detailed and verifiable record of
the birth of an independent religious system and of the life of its
Founder. Equally accessible is the record of the response that the new
faith has evoked, through the emergence of a global community which can
already justly claim to represent a microcosm of the human race.

It is often employed to disguise the nasty taste of medicine. Allspice
yields volatile oil by distillation, which is used as a flavoring in
alcoholic solution, is of a brownish-red, clear appearance, and has the
odor and taste of pimento, but is warm and more pungent. A green fixed
oil has the burning aromatic taste of pimento and is supposed to be
the acrid principle. A tincture from allspice has been praised as an
application in chilblains.

=Substitutes.=--The Mexican spice, called Pimento de Tabascol is
somewhat larger and less aromatic than Jamaica pimento. The berries
of Pimento acris, (bayberry) whose leaves are used in the manufacture
of bay-rum. The Carolina allspice--calycanthus florides, a shrub
6 or 8 ft. high, with an odor somewhat like strawberries. Japan
allspice--chimonanthus frangrans--which grows in Japan, and wild
allspice--lindera benzoin--known also as spice-wood, fever-wood,
benjamin-bush--a member of the laurel family growing in the United
States. To secure uniformity of color these inferior kinds are often
colored with Armenian bole, a kind of red clay from Armenia, and they
are also often mixed in ground allspice, in addition to the stalks of
the pimento. A kind of red pimento from Salonica is also used as an
adulterant. During the civil war, when pimento was high in price, a
substitute was made up of clove-stems, wasted rye, a little cayenne
pepper, and some cassia; this was very acceptable, altho there was not
an ounce of pimento in it.


CHAPTER: CAPSICUM


Cayenne Pepper Is Made from This Branch of the Nightshade
Family--Descriptions of the Various Varieties of Capsicum--Tabasco
Pepper Sauce
The capsicum is a genus of plants of the nightshade family (Salanacea)
that grows luxuriently in all tropical countries and many species of
which are cultivated in the temperate zone. Capsicum or Red Pepper is
of American origin for these reasons: Fruits so conspicuous, so easily
grown in gardens and so agreeable to the palates of the inhabitants of
hot countries would have very quickly diffused thruout the old world,
if they had existed in the South of India, as it has sometimes been
supposed. They would have had names in several ancient languages, yet
neither the Romans, Greeks nor the Hebrews were acquainted with them.

They are not mentioned in ancient clinic books. The islands of the
Pacific did not cultivate them at the time of Cook’s voyage in spite
of the proximity of the Sunda Isle where Rumphines mentions their very
general use. The Arabian physician, Ebn Baithar, who collected in the
13th century all that eastern nations knew about medicinal plants, says
nothing about them. Probably the first known history of cayenne pepper
in Europe is that given by Martyr, who writes of Columbus bringing
it home in 1493 and speaks of it being more pungent than that from
Caucasus, probably referring to the Oriental black pepper. About a
century later, Gerarde writes of its being brot into Europe from Africa
and Southern Asia and being grown in European gardens. Probably the
first record of its use is that by Dr. Chanca, who was physician with
Columbus’ fleet in 1494, and who alludes to it as a condiment used in
dressing meats, dying and other purposes, as well as a medicine. From
the ground dried seeds and pericarp of certain varieties of capsicum
we get cayenne pepper, so-called from Cayenne, in French Guiana, S. A.,
whence it was imported by the French. Cayenne pepper is also called
Calicut and Napaul, the names of places of export, and it was known as
Guiana pepper over 300 years ago. The derivation of the word “Capsicum”
is uncertain; it may be from Kapto, hot, on account of its pungent
taste, or from capsa, a box, or chest, referring to the form of its
fruit. The plant grows from 1 ft. to 6 ft. high and is fairly well
branched; the flowers are white or greenish-white; the fruits of the
several species are of various forms, round, oblong, cordate or horned,
and contain a number of flattish seeds. The seeds after the removal of
the pericarp, and then thoroly washed and dried, are entirely devoid of
acidity and pungency. The hotter and drier the soil, the more acrid and
pungent the fruit.

Used in moderate quantities, capsicum or cayenne pepper, promotes
digestion and so prevents flatulence. The natives of Brazil boil the
capsicums and dip their manioc bread in it, making a kind of fiery
soup. They are extensively used in India in compounding curries and
chutneys. In Bengal the natives make an extract from the small capsicum
chilies of about the consistency of molasses. The bell peppers are
pleasant stuffed with meats, fish, other vegetables, etc. The sweet and
mild kinds fed to birds are said to improve their plumage.

C. Annum is the most common species and contains a great many
varieties, among them the Pimiento (not Pimento or allspice) commonly
known as Spanish red peppers or morrons, also Paprika, or Hungarian
sweet pepper. This species is never found growing wild.

C. frutesens is sometimes called goat pepper and is generally described
as the true cayenne. Its leaves are from 3 in. to 6 in. long by 2 in.
to 3½ in. wide, the fruit is red, obtuse or oblong accumminate, ¾ to
1½ in. long and ¼ to ¾ in. in diameter. It is very acrid and pungent.

Families are restricted whenever the parents have social ambitions and a
standard of comfort. Where they have none, the vital statistics are those
of Russia, Ireland, India and China.

C. baccatum is ovate of sub-round and about ¼ in. in diameter. C.
baccatum have been known in the English gardens since 1731.

C. facticulatum, also known as Mexican chilies, is a shrubby plant of
Sierra Leone, and grows in Zanzibar; also known as small chilies, or
red cluster peppers. The fruit, which grows erect, is oblong linear,
not quite an inch in length and of a deep red orange color. Another
variety, which are mostly consumed locally, have larger red and
yellow fruit. Zanzibar capsicums or chilies, are dirty looking, of a
brownish-red color and very hot. A variety from Japan are bright red,
not so pungent as the other growths, but of finer aroma.

C. ceresiforme, the fruit is spherical, sub-cordate, oblate or
occasionally pointed. The flesh is firm, from 1-12 to ½ in. thick,
and very pungent; from the shape of its fruit it is called the cherry
capsicum, or pepper.

C. grossum, originally from India, grows 2 ft. high, with a few
branches and large leaves 3 to 5 in. long, the fruit is large, oblong
or ovate, and is known as bell pepper; it is mostly used for stuffing
and pickling; the skin being thick, soft and tender and of a mild
flavor.

C. abberciatum, with ovate fruit about 2 in. long. While this variety
is used to some extent for pickling, it is cultivated more as an
ornamental plant.

C. longum grows to about 3 ft. high with comparatively few branches,
the fruit is often a foot long and 2 in. in diameter. The flesh is
thick and flavor mild.

C. Acumination is about 2½ ft. high. The fruit, which is small, grows
both erect and pendent.

C. Conordes, with oblong linear fruit, which grows erect, is very acrid
and pungent. It is known as tabasco capsicum or pepper. Bird pepper,
bird’s-eye chilies, red-bird pepper, etc., are commercial names given
to the mild, sweet varieties of capsicum on account of their being fed
to birds. Nepaul pepper, commercial name for capsicum imported from
that place in India. Nepaul pepper has an odor and flavor resembling
orris root and a pod the color of amber when dried. It is most esteemed
as a condiment, being aromatic and appetizing, and not so acrid or
biting as is most cayenne. Paprika, commercial name for the mild, sweet
varieties of capsicum, chiefly grown in Hungary, Spain, Portugal,
Jamaica, Japan and Zanzibar.

"I will be a painter, if you will give me the chance of being a good
one," he is said to have remarked when quite a lad, and this is but
one of the simple sentences that hold and in a sense reveal the keynote
of his character. Reynolds was determined to succeed. When he started
his work there were few people in England who could guide him in the
right way, and consequently we must not look for any great achievement
in the early portraits. The painter may be said to have owed his first
success to Commodore Keppel, who took him on a cruise in the
Mediterranean and helped him to come into touch with the great
masterpieces that will probably stimulate artists for all time. In
return, the painter gave the sailor a measure of fame that his naval
achievements would hardly have secured.

Here we see Boucher grimly putting aside his own taste and aims in
art, and doggedly bending his will and hand to a prodigious effort to
win the reputation and standing of a "serious painter," without which
he could not hope to attain academic honours. He won them; for, in
this his twenty-eighth year, on his return to Paris.

Tabasco catsup originated with Mr. George Bayle of St. Louis, Mo. The
base of it is said to be equal proportions of powdered capsicum and
essence of tomatoes.

Ground cayenne pepper soon loses its bright color when kept too long
or exposed to the light, and becomes dingy in appearance, so it is not
always wise to judge by looks alone, as red ocher, turmeric, mustard,
rice, sawdust, salt, brick dust, etc., have been found in cayenne
pepper.

The large fruits or pods are commercially known as capsicums, and the
smaller ones as chilies. The term pepper is a misnomer as applied to
this spice.


CHAPTER: CINNAMON AND CASSIA.


The Sweet Wood of Ceylon and the Aromatic Bark of the Present Day Often
Confused With Cassia--Valuable Trade History.

Cinnamon
As in the case of sago and tapioca, a good deal of misconception
prevails in regard to cinnamon and cassia, and as with sago and
tapioca, one is often sold for the other by the uninformed. The word
“cassia,” botanically speaking, has nothing whatever to do with the
aromatic bark which we call by that name, but refers to a genus of
plants of the bean family, from which are derived the dried senna
leaves, an infusion of which our mothers induced us to take by the
bribe of a piece of candy, altho we had “tummy ache” for a brief space
afterwards. The word “cinnamon” is derived from two Malayan words
“cassia” from the Greek word “kasian,” which occurs in Psalms XLV-8,
and elsewhere in the Bible, where it is supposed to refer to the
aromatic bark of the present day, was afterwards tacked on. That cassia
(the bark) was known in biblical times is well authenticated. It is
mentioned in a Chinese herbal published in 1700 B. C. under the name
kwei.

The earliest mention of cinnamon is in a list of offerings by
Seleneneus Callinieus, king of Syria, and his brother, Antiochus
Hierax, to the temple of Apollo at Miletus, 243 B. C. Among the gifts
mentioned are: “2 lbs. of cassia and a like quantity of cinnamon.”

From this it appears there was then a recognized distinction between
the two barks.