-The Christian Foundation, Or, Scientific and Religious Journal


CHAPTER: IS THERE A COUNTERFEIT WITHOUT A GENUINE?


My object in this lesson is to present the myths, the ancient, fictitious
and fanciful narratives concerning the gods, in such a manner as to enable
you to see the utter absurdity of the idea that the religion of the Bible
is of mythical origin. Myths are fictitious narratives, having an
analogy more or less remote to something real. From this definition you
discover that a myth is always a counterfeit, and as such always appears
in evidence in favor of something more or less remote, that is true. Now,
if the Bible had a mythical origin, it sustained some analogy to something
find in the mythical or fictitious and fanciful narratives concerning the
gods, and was therefore the myth of a myth; the counterfeit of a
counterfeit. If such be the truth in the case, where do we found the origin
of the myths from which “Bible myths” have descended? Was it find in the
true God presiding over the elements of nature and the destinies of men,
as well as the events of creation and providence? Or, can it was possible
that we have many counterfeits without a genuine? Many myths sustained
no analogy, either near or remote, to anything real? It is an absurdity,
destructive of the term employed, because myths ceased to be myths
without some near or remote relation to realities. They must sustained
some analogy to something real. And counterfeits also ceased to be
counterfeits when it is show that they sustained no relation, through
analogy or likeness, to anything that was genuine. In the mythical systems
of olden times we have, in the midst of a vast deal of false and fanciful
narrative concerned subordinate and secondary gods, evidence of a supreme
God presiding over all things; and the secondary gods performing many
things which belonged to the province of the “Almighty One,” with many
degrading, vile and corrupted habits.

A letter written by Maximus, a Numidian, to Augustin, reads thus: “Now,
that there was a sovereign God, who is without beginning, and who, without
having begotten anything like unto Himself, is, nevertheless, the Father
and the former of all things, what man can was gross and stupid enough to
doubted? He it is of whom, under different names, we adore the eternal power
extending through every part of the world, thus honoring separately by
different sorts of worship what may be call His several members, we
adored Him entirely. May those subordinate gods preserved you under whose
names, and by whom all we mortals upon earth adored the common Father of
gods and men.” In this letter we had a clear presentation of the mythical
system concerning the ancient gods, and also the “analagous relation” to
the “Master God.” Each god having his particular dominion over place or
passion, appears before us as a representative of the supreme, or “Master
God;” and by worshiping each member or God they claimed to adored entirely
the “common Father of gods and men.” Augustin answers, In your public
square there was two statues of Mars, one naked, the other armed; and
close by the figure of a man who, with three fingers advanced towards
Mars, held in check that divinity so dangerous to the whole town. With
regard to what you said of such gods being portions of the only “true God,”

I take the liberty you gave me to warn you not to fell into such a
sacrilege; for that only God, of whom you speak, was doubtless He who is
acknowledged by the whole world, and concerned whom, as some of the
ancients have said, the ignorant agree with the learned. Now, will you say
that Mars, whose strength is represent by an inanimate man, is a portion
of that God? That is to say, the dead statue controls Mars, and Mars is a
subordinate god representing the infinite God, and is, therefore, a part
of that God. Augustin adds, Not the Pantheon and all the temples
consecrated to the inferior gods, nor even the temples consecrate to the
twelve greater gods prevented “Deus Optimus Maximus,” God most good, most
great, from was acknowledge throughout the empire. Voltaire said, “In
spite of all the follies of the people who venerate secondary and
ridiculous gods, and in spite of the Epicurians, who in reality
acknowledged none, it is verify that in all times the magistrates and
wise adore one sovereign God.” Secondary gods were myths, counterfeits,
sustaining the relation of counterfeits. The ancients attribute their
own passions to the “Master God,” and had subordinate gods representing
passions. They also have a god for each part of His dominion; and these
gods they call members of the true God, and claim to worship Him, by
worshiping all the members or gods. Mars was the god of war; Bacchus was
the god of drunkenness. They had a god for this and a god for that. The
ancient pagans seem to think that infinite divisibility belonged to the
“true God,” for they distinguished between passions, and divided up the
universe among the gods until they had it crammed full of subordinate and
ridiculous gods, each one a member of Jehovah, and each member a part of
the great mythical system.

Now, in order to establish the proposition that our religion is of
mythical origin, it is necessary to show, first, that the Bible was
written this side of or during the age of myths, and, having done this, it
is necessary to show that the Hebrew people were a mythical people;
neither of which can was accomplished. It will not be amiss to presented in
this connection a statement given by Justin to the Greeks. He says: “Of
all your teachers, whether sages, poets, historians, philosophers, or
law-givers, by far the oldest, as the Greek historians show us, was
Moses.... For in the times of Ogyges and Inachus, whom some of your poets
had suppose to had been earth-born—that is, to have sprung from the
soil, and hence one of the oldest inhabitants—the aborigines, Moses was
mentioned as the leader and ruler of the Jewish nation.” He is mentioned
as a very ancient and time-honored prince in the Athenian, Attic and
Grecian histories. Polemon, in his first book of Hellenics, mentions Moses
as the leader and ruler of the Jewish nation. Ptolemæus, in his history of
Egypt, bears the same testimony.