-The Angels of Mons: The Bowmen and Other Legends of the War-


CHAPTER: Introduction


I have been asked to write an introduction to the story of "The
Bowmen", on its publication in book form together with three other
tales of similar fashion. And I hesitate. This affair of "The Bowmen"
has been such an odd one from first to last, so many queer
complications have entered into it, there have been so many and so
divers currents and cross-currents of rumour and speculation
concerning it, that I honestly do not know where to begin. I propose,
then, to solve the difficulty by apologising for beginning at all.

For, usually and fitly, the presence of an introduction is held to
imply that there is something of consequence and importance to be
introduced. If, for example, a man has made an anthology of great
poetry, he may well write an introduction justifying his principle of
selection, pointing out here and there, as the spirit moves him, high
beauties and supreme excellencies, discoursing of the magnates and
lords and princes of literature, whom he is merely serving as groom of
the chamber. Introductions, that is, belong to the masterpieces and
classics of the world, to the great and ancient and accepted things;
and I am here introducing a short, small story of my own which
appeared in The Evening News about ten months ago.

I appreciate the absurdity, nay, the enormity of the position in all
its grossness. And my excuse for these pages must be this: that though
the story itself is nothing, it has yet had such odd and unforeseen
consequences and adventures that the tale of them may possess some
interest. And then, again, there are certain psychological morals to
be drawn from the whole matter of the tale and its sequel of rumours
and discussions that are not, I think, devoid of consequence; and so
to begin at the beginning.

This was in last August, to be more precise, on the last Sunday of
last August. There were terrible things to be read on that hot Sunday
morning between meat and mass. It was in The Weekly Dispatch that I
saw the awful account of the retreat from Mons. I no longer recollect
the details; but I have not forgotten the impression that was then on
my mind, I seemed to see a furnace of torment and death and agony and
terror seven times heated, and in the midst of the burning was the
British Army. In the midst of the flame, consumed by it and yet
aureoled in it, scattered like ashes and yet triumphant, martyred and
for ever glorious. So I saw our men with a shining about them, so I
took these thoughts with me to church, and, I am sorry to say, was
making up a story in my head while the deacon was singing the Gospel.

This was not the tale of "The Bowmen". It was the first sketch, as it
were, of "The Soldiers' Rest". I only wish I had been able to write it
as I conceived it. The tale as it stands is, I think, a far better
piece of craft than "The Bowmen", but the tale that came to me as the
blue incense floated above the Gospel Book on the desk between the
tapers: that indeed was a noble story--like all the stories that never
get written. I conceived the dead men coming up through the flames and
in the flames, and being welcomed in the Eternal Tavern with songs and
flowing cups and everlasting mirth. But every man is the child of his
age, however much he may hate it; and our popular religion has long
determined that jollity is wicked. As far as I can make out modern
Protestantism believes that Heaven is something like Evensong in an
English cathedral, the service by Stainer and the Dean preaching. For
those opposed to dogma of any kind--even the mildest--I suppose it is
held that a Course of Ethical Lectures will be arranged.

Well, I have long maintained that on the whole the average church,
considered as a house of preaching, is a much more poisonous place
than the average tavern; still, as I say, one's age masters one, and
clouds and bewilders the intelligence, and the real story of "The
Soldiers' Rest", with its "sonus epulantium in æterno convivio", was
ruined at the moment of its birth, and it was some time later that the
actual story got written. And in the meantime the plot of "The Bowmen"
occurred to me. Now it has been murmured and hinted and suggested and
whispered in all sorts of quarters that before I wrote the tale I had
heard something. The most decorative of these legends is also the most
precise: "I know for a fact that the whole thing was given him in
typescript by a lady-in-waiting." This was not the case; and all
vaguer reports to the effect that I had heard some rumours or hints of
rumours are equally void of any trace of truth.

Again I apologise for entering so pompously into the minutiæ of my bit
of a story, as if it were the lost poems of Sappho; but it appears
that the subject interests the public, and I comply with my
instructions. I take it, then, that the origins of "The Bowmen" were
composite. First of all, all ages and nations have cherished the
thought that spiritual hosts may come to the help of earthly arms,
that gods and heroes and saints have descended from their high
immortal places to fight for their worshippers and clients. Then
Kipling's story of the ghostly Indian regiment got in my head and got
mixed with the mediævalism that is always there; and so "The Bowmen"
was written. I was heartily disappointed with it, I remember, and
thought it--as I still think it--an indifferent piece of work.

However, I have tried to write for these thirty-five long years, and
if I have not become practised in letters, I am at least a past master
in the Lodge of Disappointment. Such as it was, "The Bowmen" appeared
in The Evening News of September 29th, 1914.

Now the journalist does not, as a rule, dwell much on the prospect of
fame; and if he be an evening journalist, his anticipations of
immortality are bounded by twelve o'clock at night at the latest; and
it may well be that those insects which begin to live in the morning
and are dead by sunset deem themselves immortal. Having written my
story, having groaned and growled over it and printed it, I certainly
never thought to hear another word of it. My colleague "The Londoner"
praised it warmly to my face, as his kindly fashion is; entering, very
properly, a technical caveat as to the language of the battle-cries of
the bowmen. "Why should English archers use French terms?" he said. I
replied that the only reason was this--that a "Monseigneur" here and
there struck me as picturesque; and I reminded him that, as a matter
of cold historical fact, most of the archers of Agincourt were
mercenaries from Gwent, my native country, who would appeal to
Mihangel and to saints not known to the Saxons--Teilo, Iltyd, Dewi,
Cadwaladyr Vendigeid. And I thought that that was the first and last
discussion of "The Bowmen". But in a few days from its publication the
editor of The Occult Review wrote to me. He wanted to know whether
the story had any foundation in fact. I told him that it had no
foundation in fact of any kind or sort; I forget whether I added that
it had no foundation in rumour but I should think not, since to the
best of my belief there were no rumours of heavenly interposition in
existence at that time. Certainly I had heard of none. Soon afterwards
the editor of Light wrote asking a like question, and I made him a
like reply. It seemed to me that I had stifled any "Bowmen" mythos in
the hour of its birth.

A month or two later, I received several requests from editors of
parish magazines to reprint the story. I--or, rather, my editor--
readily gave permission; and then, after another month or two, the
conductor of one of these magazines wrote to me, saying that the
February issue containing the story had been sold out, while there was
still a great demand for it. Would I allow them to reprint "The
Bowmen" as a pamphlet, and would I write a short preface giving the
exact authorities for the story? I replied that they might reprint in
pamphlet form with all my heart, but that I could not give my
authorities, since I had none, the tale being pure invention. The
priest wrote again, suggesting--to my amazement--that I must be
mistaken, that the main "facts" of "The Bowmen" must be true, that my
share in the matter must surely have been confined to the elaboration
and decoration of a veridical history. It seemed that my light fiction
had been accepted by the congregation of this particular church as the
solidest of facts; and it was then that it began to dawn on me that if
I had failed in the art of letters, I had succeeded, unwittingly, in
the art of deceit. This happened, I should think, some time in April,
and the snowball of rumour that was then set rolling has been rolling
ever since, growing bigger and bigger, till it is now swollen to a
monstrous size.

It was at about this period that variants of my tale began to be told
as authentic histories. At first, these tales betrayed their relation
to their original. In several of them the vegetarian restaurant
appeared, and St. George was the chief character. In one case an
officer--name and address missing--said that there was a portrait of
St. George in a certain London restaurant, and that a figure, just
like the portrait, appeared to him on the battlefield, and was invoked
by him, with the happiest results. Another variant--this, I think,
never got into print--told how dead Prussians had been found on the
battlefield with arrow wounds in their bodies. This notion amused me,
as I had imagined a scene, when I was thinking out the story, in which
a German general was to appear before the Kaiser to explain his
failure to annihilate the English.

"All-Highest," the general was to say, "it is true, it is impossible
to deny it. The men were killed by arrows; the shafts were found in
their bodies by the burying parties."

I rejected the idea as over-precipitous even for a mere fantasy. I was
therefore entertained when I found that what I had refused as too
fantastical for fantasy was accepted in certain occult circles as hard
fact.

Other versions of the story appeared in which a cloud interposed
between the attacking Germans and the defending British. In some
examples the cloud served to conceal our men from the advancing enemy;
in others, it disclosed shining shapes which frightened the horses of
the pursuing German cavalry. St. George, it will he noted, has
disappeared--he persisted some time longer in certain Roman Catholic
variants--and there are no more bowmen, no more arrows. But so far
angels are not mentioned; yet they are ready to appear, and I think
that I have detected the machine which brought them into the story.

In "The Bowmen" my imagined soldier saw "a long line of shapes, with a
shining about them." And Mr. A.P. Sinnett, writing in the May issue of
The Occult Review, reporting what he had heard, states that "those
who could see said they saw 'a row of shining beings' between the two
armies." Now I conjecture that the word "shining" is the link between
my tale and the derivative from it. In the popular view shining and
benevolent supernatural beings are angels, and so, I believe, the
Bowmen of my story have become "the Angels of Mons." In this shape
they have been received with respect and credence everywhere, or
almost everywhere.

And here, I conjecture, we have the key to the large popularity of the
delusion--as I think it. We have long ceased in England to take much
interest in saints, and in the recent revival of the cultus of St.
George, the saint is little more than a patriotic figurehead. And the
appeal to the saints to succour us is certainly not a common English
practice; it is held Popish by most of our countrymen. But angels,
with certain reservations, have retained their popularity, and so,
when it was settled that the English army in its dire peril was
delivered by angelic aid, the way was clear for general belief, and
for the enthusiasms of the religion of the man in the street. And so
soon as the legend got the title "The Angels of Mons" it became
impossible to avoid it. It permeated the Press: it would not be
neglected; it appeared in the most unlikely quarters.